How the Poverty of the Stimulus
Solves the Poverty of the Stimulus
Willem Zuidema
Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit
and Institute for Cell, Animal and Population Biology
University of Edinburgh
40 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9LL, United Kingdom
jelle@ling.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
Language acquisition is a special kind of learning problem because
the outcome of learning of one generation is the input for the next.
That makes it possible for languages to adapt to the particularities
of the learner. In this paper, I show that this type of language
change has important consequences for models of the evolution and
acquisition of syntax.
1 The Language Acquisition Problem
For both articial systems and non-human animals, learning the syntax of natural
languages is a notoriously hard problem. All healthy human infants, in contrast,
learn any of the approximately 6000 human languages rapidly, accurately and spon-
taneously. Any explanation of how they accomplish this di∆cult task must specify
the (innate) inductive bias that human infants bring to bear, and the input data
that is available to them. Traditionally, the inductive bias is termed { somewhat un-
fortunately { \Universal Grammar", and the input data \primary linguistic data".
Over the last 30 years or so, a view on the acquisition of the syntax of natural
language has become popular that has put much emphasis on the innate machinery.
In this view, that one can call the \Principles and Parameters" model, the Universal
Grammar species most aspects of syntax in great detail [e.g. 1]. The role of
experience is reduced to setting a limited number (30 or so) of parameters. The main
argument for this view is the argument from the poverty of the stimulus [2]. This
argument states that children have insu∆cient evidence in the primary linguistic
data to induce the grammar of their native language.
Mark Gold [3] provides the most well-known formal basis to this argument. Gold
introduced the criterion \identication in the limit" for evaluating the success of a
learning algorithm: with an innite number of training samples all hypotheses of
the algorithm should be identical, and equivalent to the target. Gold showed that
the class of context-free grammars is not learnable in this sense by any algorithm
from positive samples alone (and neither are other super-nite classes). This proof
is based on the fact that no matter how many samples from an innite language a

learning algorithm has seen, the algorithm can not decide with certainty that the
samples are drawn from the innite language or from a nite language that con-
tains all samples. Because natural languages are thought to be at least as complex
as context-free grammars, and negative feedback is assumed to be absent in the
primary linguistic data, Gold's analysis, and subsequent work in learnability theory
[1], is usually interpreted as strong support for the argument from the poverty of the
stimulus, and, in the extreme, for the view that grammar induction is fundamentally
impossible (a claim that Gold would not subscribe to).
Critics of this \nativist" approach [e.g. 4, 5] have argued for dierent assumptions
on the appropriate grammar formalism (e.g. stochastic context-free grammars), the
available primary data (e.g. semantic information) or the appropriate learnability
criterion. In this paper I will take a dierent approach. I will present a model that
induces context-free grammars without a-priori restrictions on the search space, se-
mantic information or negative evidence. Gold's negative results thus apply. Never-
theless, acquisition of grammar is successful in my model, because another process
is taken into account as well: the cultural evolution of language.
2 The Language Evolution Problem
Whereas in language acquisition research the central question is how a child acquires
an existing language, in language evolution research the central question is how this
language and its properties have emerged in the rst place. Within the nativist
paradigm, some have suggested that the answer to this question is that Universal
Grammar is the product of evolution under selection pressures for communication
[e.g. 6]. Recently, several formal models have been presented to evaluate this view.
For this paper, the most relevant of those is the model of Nowak et al. [7].
In that model it is assumed that there is a nite number of grammars, that new-
comers (infants) learn their grammar from the population, that more successful
grammars have a higher probability of being learned and that mistakes are made in
learning. The system can thus be described in terms of the changes in the relative
frequencies x i of each grammar type i in the population. The rst result that Nowak
et al. obtain is a \coherence threshold". This threshold is the necessary condition
for grammatical coherence in a population, i.e. for a majority of individuals to use
the same grammar. They show that this coherence depends on the chances that a
child has to correctly acquire its parents' grammar. This probability is described
with the parameter q. Nowak et al. show analytically that there is a minimum value
for q to keep coherence in the population. If q is lower than this value, all possible
grammar types are equally frequent in the population and the communicative suc-
cess in minimal. If q is higher than this value, one grammar type is dominant; the
communicative success is much higher than before and reaches 100% if q = 1.
The second result relates this required delity (called q 1 ) to a lower bound (b c )
on the number of sample sentences that a child needs. Nowak et al. make the
crucial assumption that all languages are equally expressive and equally dierent
from each other. With that assumption they can show that b c is proportional to
the total number of possible grammars N . Of course, the actual number of sample
sentences b is nite; Nowak et al. conclude that only if N is relatively small can
a stable grammar emerge in a population. I.e. the population dynamics require a
restrictive Universal Grammar.
The models of Gold and Nowak et al. have in common that they implicitly assume
that every possible grammar is equally likely to become the target grammar for
learning. If even the best possible learning algorithm cannot learn such a grammar,

the set of allowed grammars must be restricted. There is, however, reason to believe
that this assumption is not the most useful for language learning. Language learning
is a very particular type of learning problem, because the outcome of the learning
process at one generation is the input for the next. The samples from which a child
learns with its learning procedure, are therefore biased by the learning of previous
generations that used the same procedure[8].
In [9] and other papers, Kirby, Hurford and students have developed a framework
to study the consequences of that fact. In this framework, called the \Iterated
Learning Model" (ILM), a population of individuals is modeled that can each pro-
duce and interpret sentences, and have a language acquisition procedure to learn
grammar from each other. In the ILM one individual (the parent) presents a rela-
tively small number of examples of form{meaning pairs to the next individual (the
child). The child then uses these examples to induce his own grammar. In the next
iteration the child becomes the parent, and a new individual becomes the child.
This process is repeated many times. Interestingly, Kirby and Hurford have found
that in these iterated transmission steps the language becomes easier and easier to
learn, because the language adapts to the learning algorithm by becoming more
and more structured. The structure of language in these models thus emerges from
the iteration of learning. The role of biological evolution, in this view, is to shape
the learning algorithms, such that the complex results of the iterated learning is
biologically adaptive [10]. In this paper I will show that if one adopts this view on
the interactions between learning, cultural evolution and biological evolution, the
models such as those of Gold [3] and Nowak et al. [7] can no longer be taken as
evidence for an extensive, innate pre-specication of human language.
3 A Simple Model of Grammar Induction
To study the interactions between language adaptation and language acquisition, I
have rst designed a grammar induction algorithm that is simple, but can never-
theless deal with some non-trivial induction problems. The model uses context-free
grammars to represent linguistic abilities. In particular, the representation is lim-
ited to grammars G where all rules are of one of the following forms: (1) A 7! t, (2)
A 7! BC, (3) A 7! Bt. The nonterminals A; B; C are elements of the non-terminal
alphabet V nt , which includes the start symbol S. t is a string of terminal sym-
bols from the terminal alphabet V t 1 . For determining the language L of a certain
grammar G I use simple depth-rst exhaustive search of the derivation tree. For
computational reasons, the depth of the search is limited to a certain depth d, and
the string length is limited to length l. The set of sentences (L 0  L) used in train-
ing and in communication is therefore nite (and strictly speaking not context-free,
but regular); in production, strings are drawn from a uniform distribution over L 0 .
The grammar induction algorithm learns from a set of sample strings (sentences)
that are provided by a teacher. The design of the learning algorithm is originally
inspired by [11] and is similar to the algorithm in [12]. The algorithm ts within a
tradition of algorithms that search for compact descriptions of the input data [e.g.
13, 14, 15]. It consists of three operations:
Incorporation: extend the language, such that it includes the encountered string ;
if string s is not already part of the language, add a rule S 7! s to the
grammar.
1 Note that the restrictions on the rule-types above do not limit the scope of languages
that can be represented (they are essentially equivalent to Chomsky Normal Form). They
are, however, relevant for the language acquisition algorithm.

Compression: substitute frequent and long substrings with a nonterminal, such
that the grammar becomes smaller and the language remains unchanged ;
for every valid substring z of the right-hand sides of all rules, calculate the
compression eect v(z) of substituting z with a nonterminal A; replace all
valid occurrences of the substring z 0 = argmax z v(z) with A if v(z 0 ) > 0, and
add a rule A 7! z 0 to the grammar. \Valid substrings" are those substrings
which can be replaced while keeping all rules of the forms 1{3 described
above. The compression eect is measured as the dierence between the
number of symbols in the grammar before and after the substitution. The
compression step is repeated until the grammar does not change anymore.
Generalization: equate two nonterminals, such that the grammar becomes smaller
and the language larger ; for every combination of two nonterminals A and
B (B 6= S), calculate the compression eect v of equating A and B. Equate
the combination (A 0 ; B 0 ) = argmax A;B v(A; B) if v(A 0 ; B 0 ) > 0; i.e. replace
all occurrences of B with A. The compression eect is measured as the
dierence between the number of symbols before and after replacing and
deleting redundant rules. The generalization step is repeated until the
grammar does not change anymore.
4 Learnable and Unlearnable Classes
The algorithm described above is implemented in C ++ and tested on a variety of
target grammars 2 . I will not present a detailed analysis of the learning behavior
here, but limit myself to a simple example that shows that the algorithm can learn
some (recursive) grammars, while it can not learn others. The induction algorithm
receives three sentences (abcd, abcabcd, abcabcabcd). The incorporation, com-
pression (repeated twice) and generalization steps yield subsequently the following
grammars:
(a) Incorporation
S 7! abcd
S 7! abcabcd
S 7! abcabcabcd
(b) Compression
S 7! Yd
S 7! Xd
S 7! Xabcd
X 7! YY
Y 7! abc
(c) Generalization
S 7! Xd
S 7! Xabcd
X 7! XX
X 7! abc
In (b) the substrings \abcabc" and \abc" are subsequently replaced by the non-
terminals X and Y. In (c) the non-terminals X and Y are equated, which leads to
the deletion of the second rule in (b). One can check that the total size of the
grammar reduces from 24, to 19 and further down to 16 characters.
From this example it is also clear that learning is not always successful. Any of the
three grammars above ((a) and (b) are equivalent) could have generated the train-
ing data, but with these three input strings the algorithm always yields grammar
(c). Consistent with Gold's general proof [3], many target grammars will never be
learned correctly, no matter how many input strings are generated. In practice,
each nite set of randomly generated strings from some target grammar, might
yield a dierent result. Thus, for some number of input strings T , some set of tar-
get grammars are always acquired, some are never acquired, and some are some of
the time acquired. If we can enumerate all possible grammars, we can describe this
with a matrix Q, where each entry Q ij describes the probability that the algorithm
learning from sample strings from a target grammar i, will end up with grammar
2 The source code is available at http://www.ling.ed.ac.uk/jelle

of type j. Q ii is the probability that the algorithm nds the target grammar. To
make learning successful, the target grammars that are presented to the algorithm
have to be biased. The following section will show that for this we need nothing
more than to assume that the output of one learner is the input for the next.
5 Iterated Learning: the Emergence of Learnability
To study the eects of iterated learning, we extend the model with a population
structure. In the new version of the model individuals (agents, that each represent
a generation) are placed in a chain. The rst agent induces its grammar from a
number E of randomly generated strings. Every subsequent agent (the child) learns
its grammar from T sample sentences that are generated by the previous one (the
parent). To avoid insu∆cient expressiveness, we also extend the generalization step
with a check if the number EG of dierent strings the grammar G can recognize is
larger than or equal to E. If not, E EG random new strings are generated and
incorporated in the grammar. Using the matrix Q from the previous section, we can
formalize this iterated learning model with the following general equation, where x i
is the probability that grammar i is the grammar of the current generation:
x i =
N
X
j=0
x j Q ji (1)
In simulations such as the one of gure 1 communicative success between child and
parent { a measure for the learnability of a grammar { rises steadily from a low
value (here 0.65) to a high value (here 1.0). In the initial stage the grammar shows
no structure, and consequently almost every string that the grammar produces
is idiosyncratic. A child in this stage typically hears strings like \ada", \ddac",
\adba", \bcbd", or \cdca" from its parent. It can not discover many regularities in
these strings. The child therefore can not do much better than simply reproduce the
strings it heard (i.e. T random draws from at least E dierent strings), and generate
random new strings, if necessary to make sure its language obeys the minimum
number (E) of strings. However, in these randomly generated strings, sometimes
regularities appear. I.e., a parent may use the randomly generated strings \dcac",
\bcac", \caac" and \daac". When this happens the child tends to analyze these
strings as dierent combinations with the building block \ac". Thus, typically,
the learning algorithm generates a grammar with the rules S 7! dcX , S 7! bcX ,
S 7! caX , S 7! daX , and X 7! ac. When this happens to another set of strings as
well, say with a new rule Y 7! b, the generalization procedure can decide to equate
the non-terminals X and Y . The resulting grammar can then generalize from the
observed strings, to the unobserved strings \dcb", \bcb", \cab" and \dab". The
child still needs to generate random new strings to reach the minimum E, but fewer
than in the case considered above.
The interesting aspect of this becomes clear when we consider the next step in the
simulation, when the child becomes itself the parent of a new child. This child
is now presented with a language with more regularities than before, and has a
fair chance of correctly generalizing to unseen examples. If, for instance, it only
sees the strings \dcac", \bcac", \caac", \bcb", \cab" and \dab", it can, through
the same procedure as above, infer that \daac" and \dcb" are also part of the
target language. This means that (i) the child shares more strings with its parent
than just the ones it observes and consequently shows a higher between generation
communicative success, and (ii) regularities that appear in the language by chance,
have a fair chance to remain in the language. In the process of iterated learning,
languages can thus become more structured and better learnable.

(a) Learnability (b) Number of rules (c) Expressiveness
Figure 1: Iterated Learning: although initially the target language is unstructured
and di∆cult to learn, over the course of 20 generations (a) the learnability (the frac-
tion of successful communications with the parent) steadily increases, (b) the num-
ber of rules steadily decreases (combinatorial and recursive stategies are used), and
(c) after a initial phase of overgeneralization, the expressiveness remains close to its
minimally required level. Parameters: V t = fa; b; c; dg, V nt = fS; X;Y; Z; A; B; Cg,
T=30, E=20, l 0 =3. Shown are the average values of 2 simulations.
Similar results with dierent formalisms were already reported before [e.g. 11, 16],
but here I have used context-free grammars and the results are therefore directly
relevant for the interpretation of Gold's proof [3]. Whereas in the usual interpre-
tation of that proof [e.g. 1] it is assumed that we need innate constraints on the
search space in addition to a smart learning procedure, here I show that even a
simple learning procedure can lead to successful acquisition, because restrictions
on the search space automatically emerge in the iteration of learning. If one con-
siders learnability a binary feature { as is common in generative linguistics { this
is a rather trivial phenomenon: languages that are not learnable will not occur in
the next generation. However, if there are gradations in learnability, the cultural
evolution of language can be an intricate process where languages get shaped over
many generations.
6 Language Adaptation and the Coherence Threshold
When we study this eect in a version of the model where selection does play a
role, it is also relevant for the analysis in [7]. The model is therefore extended such
that at every generation there is a population of agents, agents of one generation
communicate with each other and the expected number of ospring of an agent (the
tness) is determined by the number of successful interactions it had. Children still
acquire their grammar from sample strings produced by their parent. Adapting
equation 1, this system can now be described with the following equation, where
x i is now the relative fraction of grammar i in the population (assuming an innite
population size):
x i =
N
X
j=0
x j f j Q ji x i (2)
Here, f i is the relative tness (quality) of grammars of type i and equals f i =
P
j x j F ij , where F ij is the expected communicative success from an interaction
between an individual of type i and an individual of type j. The relative tness f of a
grammar thus depends on the frequencies of all grammar types, hence it is frequency
dependent.  is the average tness in the population and equals  =
P
i x i f i . This

term is needed to keep the sum of all fractions at 1. This equation is essentially the
model of Nowak et al. [7]. Recall that the main result of that paper is a \coherence
threshold": a minimum value for the learning accuracy q to keep coherence in the
population. In previous work [unpublished] I have reproduced this result and shown
that it is robust against variations in the Q-matrix, as long as the value of q (i.e.
the diagonal values) remains equal for all grammars.
0 20 40 60 80 100
generations
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
C
(communicative
success)
between generation C
within generation C
Figure 2: Results from a run under tness proportional selection. This gure shows
that there are regions of grammar space where the dynamics are apparently under
the \coherence threshold" [7], while there are other regions where the dynamics are
above this threshold. The parameters, including the number of sample sentences T ,
are still the same, but the language has adapted itself to the bias of the learning
algorithm. Parameters are: V t = f0; 1; 2; 3g, V nt = fS; a; b; c; d; e; fg, P=20, T=100,
E=100, l 0 =12. Shown are the average values of 20 agents.
Figure 2, however, shows results from a simulation with the grammar induction
algorithm described above, where this condition is violated. Whereas in the simu-
lations of gure 1 the target languages have been relatively easy (the initial string
length is short, i.e. 6), here the learning problem is very di∆cult (initial string
length is long, i.e. 12). For a long period the learning is therefore not very suc-
cessful, but around generation 70 the success suddenly rises. With always the same
T (number of sample sentences), and with always the same grammar space, there
are regions where the dynamics are apparently under the \coherence threshold",
while there are other regions where the dynamics are above this threshold. The
language has adapted to the learning algorithm, and, consequently, the coherence
in the population does not satisfy the prediction of Nowak et al.
7 Conclusions
I believe that these results have some important consequences for our thinking
about language acquisition. In particular, they oer a dierent perspective on the
argument from the poverty of the stimulus, and thus on one of the most central
\problems" of language acquisition research: the logical problem of language acqui-
sition. My results indicate that in iterated learning it is not necessary to put the
(whole) explanatory burden on the representation bias. Although the details of the
grammatical formalism (context-free grammars) and the population structure are
deliberately close to [3] and [7] respectively, I do observe successful acquisition of
grammars from a class that is unlearnable by Gold's criterion. Further, I observe
grammatical coherence even though many more grammars are allowed in principle
than Nowak et al. calculate as an upper bound. The reason for these surprising
results is that language acquisition is a very particular type of learning problem:
it is a problem where the target of the learning process is itself the outcome of a
learning process. That opens up the possibility of language itself to adapt to the

language acquisition procedure of children. In such iterated learning situations [11],
learners are only presented with targets that other learners have been able to learn.
Isn't this the traditional Universal Grammar in disguise? Learnability is { consistent
with the undisputed proof of [3] { still achieved by constraining the set of targets.
However, unlike in usual interpretations of this proof, these constraints are not
strict (some grammars are better learnable than others, allowing for an innite
\Grammar Universe"), and they are not a-priori: they are the outcome of iterated
learning. The poverty of the stimulus is now no longer a problem; instead, the
ancestors' poverty is the solution for the child's.
Acknowledgments This work was performed while I was at the AI Laboratory
of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel. It builds on previous work that was done in close
collaboration with Paulien Hogeweg of Utrecht University. I thank her and Simon
Kirby, John Batali, Aukje Zuidema and my colleagues at the AI Lab and the LEC
for valuable hints, questions and remarks. Funding from the Concerted Research
Action fund of the Flemish Government and the VUB, from the Prins Bernhard
Cultuurfonds and from a Marie Curie Fellowship of the European Commission are
gratefully acknowledged.
References
[1] Stefano Bertolo, editor. Language Acquisition and Learnability. Cambridge University
Press, 2001.
[2] Noam Chomsky. Aspects of the theory of syntax. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1965.
[3] E. M. Gold. Language identication in the limit. Information and Control (now
Information and Computation), 10:447{474, 1967.
[4] Michael A. Arbib and Jane C. Hill. Language acquisition: Schemas replace univer-
sal grammar. In John A. Hawkins, editor, Explaining Language Universals. Basil
Blackwell, New York, USA, 1988.
[5] J. Elman, E. Bates, et al. Rethinking innateness. MIT Press, 1996.
[6] Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom. Natural language and natural selection. Behavioral
and brain sciences, 13:707{784, 1990.
[7] Martin A. Nowak, Natalia Komarova, and Partha Niyogi. Evolution of universal
grammar. Science, 291:114{118, 2001.
[8] Terrence Deacon. Symbolic species, the co-evolution of language and the human brain.
The Penguin Press, 1997.
[9] S. Kirby and J. Hurford. The emergence of linguistic structure: An overview of the
iterated learning model. In Angelo Cangelosi and Domenico Parisi, editors, Simulating
the Evolution of Language, chapter 6, pages 121{148. Springer Verlag, London, 2002.
[10] Kenny Smith. Natural selection and cultural selection in the evolution of communi-
cation. Adaptive Behavior, 2003. to appear.
[11] Simon Kirby. Syntax without natural selection: How compositionality emerges from
vocabulary in a population of learners. In C. Knight et al., editors, The Evolutionary
Emergence of Language. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[12] J. Gerard Wol. Language acquisition, data compression and generalization. Language
& Communication, 2(1):57{89, 1982.
[13] A. Stolcke. Bayesian Learning of Probabilistic Language Models. PhD thesis, Dept.
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley,
1994.
[14] Menno van Zaanen and Pieter Adriaans. Comparing two unsupervised grammar
induction systems: Alignment-based learning vs. EMILE. In Ben Krose et al., editors,
Proceedings of BNAIC 2001, 2001.
[15] Zach Solan, Eytan Ruppin, David Horn, and Shimon Edelman. Automatic acquisition
and e∆cient representation of syntactic structures. This volume.
[16] Henry Brighton. Compositional syntax from cultural transmission. Articial Life,
8(1), 2002.

