Dopamine Induced Bistability Enhances
Signal Processing in Spiny Neurons
Aaron J. Gruber 1;2 , Sara A. Solla 2;3 , and James C. Houk 2;1
Departments of Biomedical Engineering 1 , Physiology 2 , and Physics and Astronomy 3
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60201
f a-gruber1, solla, j-houk g@northwestern.edu
Abstract
Single unit activity in the striatum of awake monkeys shows a
marked dependence on the expected reward that a behavior will
elicit. We present a computational model of spiny neurons, the
principal neurons of the striatum, to assess the hypothesis that di-
rect neuromodulatory eects of dopamine through the activation
of D1 receptors mediate the reward dependency of spiny neuron
activity. Dopamine release results in the amplication of key ion
currents, leading to the emergence of bistability, which not only
modulates the peak ring rate but also introduces a temporal and
state dependence of the model's response, thus improving the de-
tectability of temporally correlated inputs.
1 Introduction
The classic notion of the basal ganglia as being involved in purely motor processing
has expanded over the years to include sensory and cognitive functions. A sur-
prising new nding is that much of this activity shows a motivational component.
For instance, striatal activity related to visual stimuli is dependent on the type of
reinforcement (primary vs secondary) that a behavior will elicit [1]. Task-related
activity can be enhanced or suppressed when a reward is anticipated for correct
performance, relative to activity when no reward is expected. Although the origin
of this reward dependence has not been experimentally veried, dopamine modula-
tion is likely to play a role. Spiny neurons in the striatum, the input to the basal
ganglia, receive a prominent neuromodulatory input from dopamine neurons in the
substantia nigra pars compacta. These dopamine neurons discharge in a reward-
dependent manner [2]; they respond to the delivery of unexpected rewards and to
sensory cues that reliably precede the delivery of expected rewards.
Activation of dopamine receptors alters the response characteristics of spiny neurons
by modulating the properties of voltage-gated ion channels, as opposed to simple
excitatory or inhibitory eects [3]. Activation of the D1 type dopamine receptor
alone can either enhance or suppress neural responses depending on the prior state
of the spiny neuron [4]. Here, we use a computational approach to assess the
hypothesis that the modulation of specic ion channels through the activation of
D1 receptors is su∆cient to explain both the enhanced and suppressed single unit

responses of medium spiny neurons to reward-predicting stimuli.
We have constructed a biophysically grounded model of a spiny neuron and used it to
investigate whether dopamine neuromodulation accounts for the observed reward-
dependence of striatal single-unit responses to visual targets in the memory guided
saccade task described by [1]. These authors used an asymmetric reward sched-
ule and compared the response to a given target in rewarded as opposed to unre-
warded cases. They report a substantial reward-dependent dierence; the majority
of these neurons showed a reward-related enhancement of the intensity and duration
of discharge, and a smaller number exhibited a reward-related depression. The au-
thors speculated that D1 receptor activation might account for enhanced responses,
whereas D2 receptor activation might explain the depressed responses. The model
presented here demonstrates that neuromodulatory actions of dopamine through
D1 receptors su∆ce to account for both eects, with interesting consequences for
information processing.
2 Model description
The membrane properties of the model neuron result from an accurate representa-
tion of a minimal set of currents needed to reproduce the characteristic behavior of
spiny neurons. In low dopamine conditions, these cells exhibit quasi two-state be-
havior; they spend most of their time either in a hyperpolarized `down' state around
85 mV , or in a depolarized `up' state around 55 mV [5]. This bimodal character
of the response to cortical input is attributed to a combination of inward rectify-
ing (IRK) and outward rectifying (ORK) potassium currents [5]. IRK contributes
a small outward current at hyperpolarized membrane potentials, thus providing
resistance to depolarization and stabilizing the down state. ORK is a major hy-
perpolarizing current that becomes activated at depolarized potentials and opposes
the depolarizing inuences of excitatory synaptic and inward ionic currents; it is
their balance that determines the membrane potential of the up state. In addition
to IRK and ORK currents, the model incorporates the L-type calcium (L-Ca) cur-
rent that starts to provide an inward current at subthreshold membrane potentials,
thus determining the voltage range of the up state. This current has the ability to
increase the ring rate of spiny neurons and is critical to the enhancement of spiny
neuron responses in the presence of D1 agonists [4].
Our goal is to design a model that provides a consistent description of membrane
properties in the 100 - 1000 ms time range. This is the characteristic range of
duration for up and down state episodes; it also spans the time course of short
term modulatory eects of dopamine. The model is constructed according to the
principle of separation of time scales: processes that operate in the 100-1000 ms
range are modeled as accurately as possible, those that vary on a much shorter time
scale are assumed to instantaneously achieve their steady-state values, and those
that occur over longer time scales, such as slow inactivation, are assumed constant.
Thus, the model does not incorporate currents which inactivate on a short time
scale, and cannot provide a good description of rapid events such as the transitions
between up and down states or the generation of action potentials.
The membrane of a spiny neuron is modeled here as a single compartment with
steady-state voltage-gated ion currents. A rst order dierential equation relates
the temporal change in membrane potential (V m ) to the membrane currents (I i ),
Cm dVm
dt
=  (I IRK + I L Ca ) + I ORK + I l + I s : (1)

The right hand side of the equation includes active ionic, leakage, and synaptic
currents. The multiplicative factor  models the modulatory eects of D1 receptor
activation by dopamine, to be described in more detail later. Ionic currents are
modeled using a standard formulation; the parameters are as reported in the bio-
physical literature, except for adjustments that compensate for specic experimental
conditions so as to more closely match in vivo realizations.
All currents except for L-Ca are modeled by the product of a voltage gated conduc-
tance and a linear driving force, I i = g i (V m E i ), where E i is the reversal potential
of ion species i and g i is the corresponding conductance. The leakage conductance
is constant; the conductances for IRK and ORK are voltage gated, g i =  g i L i (Vm ),
where 
g i is the maximum conductance and L i (V m ) is a logistic function of the
membrane potential. Calcium currents are not well represented by a linear driving
force model; extremely low intracellular calcium concentrations result in a nonlinear
driving force well accounted for by the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation [6],
I L Ca = 
PL CaLL Ca (V m )

z 2 VmF 2
RT
  
[Ca] i [Ca] o e zVmF
RT
1 e zVmF
RT
!
; (2)
where 
PL Ca is the maximum permeability. The resulting ionic currents are shown
in Fig 1A.
The synaptic current is modeled as the product of a conductance and a linear
driving force, I s = g s (Vm E s ), with E s = 0. The synaptic conductance includes
two types of cortical input: a phasic sensory-related component g p , and a tonic
context-related component g t , which are added to determine the total synaptic
input: g s = (g p + g t ). The factor  is a random variable that simulates the noisy
character of synaptic input.
Dopamine modulates the properties of ion currents though the activation of specic
receptors. Agonists for the D1 type receptor enhance the IRK and L-Ca currents
observed in spiny neurons [7, 8]. This eect is modeled by the factor  in Eq 1.
An upper bound of  = 1:4 is derived from physiological experiments [7, 8]. The
lower bound at  = 1:0 corresponds to low dopamine levels; this is the experimental
condition in which the ion currents have been characterized.
3 Static and dynamic properties
Stationary solutions to Eq 1 correspond to equilibrium values of the membrane
potential Vm consistent with specic values of the dopamine controlled conductance
gain parameter  and the total synaptic conductance g s ; uctuations of g s around
its mean value are ignored in this section: the noise parameter is set to  = 1.
Stationary solutions satisfy dVm =dt = 0; it follows from Eq 1 that they result from
(I IRK + I L Ca ) + I ORK + I l = g s Vm : (3)
Intersections between a curve representing the total ionic current (left hand side of
Eq 3) as a function of Vm and a straight line representing the negative of the synaptic
current (right hand side of Eq 3) determine the stationary values of the membrane
potential. Solutions to Eq 3 can be followed as a function of g s for xed  by varying
the slope of the straight line. For  = 1 there is only one such intersection for any
value of g s . At low dopamine levels, Vm is a single-valued monotonically increasing
function of g s , shown in Fig 1B (dotted line). This operational curve describes a

A B
U
D
U
D
down state
up state
0 10 20
≠90
≠70
≠50
≠30
≠100 ≠80 ≠60 ≠40
≠2
0
2 ORK
IRK
L≠Ca
high Da
high
Da
low
Da
low Da
I
(µA/cm
2 )
Vm (mV) g s (µS/cm 2 )
Vm
(mV)
Figure 1: Model characterization in low ( = 1:0, dotted lines) and high ( = 1:4,
solid lines) dopamine conditions. (A) Voltage-gated ion currents. (B) Operational
curves: stationary solutions to Eq 1.
gradual, smooth transition from hyperpolarized values of Vm corresponding to the
down state to depolarized values of Vm corresponding to the up state. At high
dopamine levels ( = 1:4), the membrane potential is a single-valued monotonically
increasing function of the synaptic conductance for either g s < 9:74 S=cm 2 or
gs > 14:17 S=cm 2 . In the intermediate regime 9:74 S=cm 2 < g s < 14:17 S=cm 2 ,
there are three solutions to Eq 3 for each value of g s . The resulting operational
curve, shown Fig 1B (solid line), consists of three branches: two stable and one
unstable. The two stable branches (dark solid lines) correspond to a hyperpolarized
down state (lower branch) and a depolarized up state (upper branch). The unstable
branch (solid gray line) corresponds to intermediate values of Vm that are not
spontaneously sustainable.
Bistability arises through a saddle node bifurcation with increasing  and has a
drastic eect on the response properties of the model neuron in high dopamine
conditions. Consider an experiment in which  is xed at 1.4 and g s changes slowly
so as to allow Vm to follow its equilibrium value on the operational curve for  = 1:4
(see Fig 1B). As g s increases, the hyperpolarized down state follows the lower stable
branch. As g s reaches 14:17 S=cm 2 , the synaptic current suddenly overcomes the
mostly IRK hyperpolarizing current, and Vm depolarizes abruptly to reach an up
state stabilized by the activation of the hyperpolarizing ORK current. This is
the down to up (D!U) state transition. As g s is increased further, the up state
follows the upper stable branch, with a small amount of additional depolarization.
If g s is now decreased, the depolarized up state follows the stable upper branch
in the downward direction. It is the inward L-Ca current which counteracts the
hyperpolarizing eect of the ORK current and stabilizes the up state until g s reaches
9:74 S=cm 2 , where a net hyperpolarizing ionic current overtakes the system and
Vm hyperpolarizes abruptly to the down state. This is the up to down (U!D) state
transition.
The emergence of bistability in high dopamine conditions results in a prominent
hysteresis eect. The state of the model, as described by the value of Vm , depends
not only on the current values of  and g s , but also on the particular trajectory
followed by these parameters to reach their current values. The appearance of
bistability gives a well dened meaning to the notion of a down state and an up state:
in this case there is a gap between the two stable branches, while in low dopamine
conditions the transition is smooth, with no clear separation between states. We
generically refer to hyperpolarized potentials as the down state and depolarized
potentials as the up state, for consistency with the electrophysiological terminology.

Unrewarded Trial Rewarded Trial
A
B
Unrewarded Trial Rewarded Trial
≠Da
+g p
≠g p
≠70
≠90
≠50
≠30
0 8 16
g s (µS/cm 2 )
0 8
≠70
≠90
≠50
≠30
Vm
(mV)
0 8 16 0 8 16
g D U
V f
g* s
+Da
+g p
≠g p
V f
g s (µS/cm 2 )
g s (µS/cm 2 ) g s (µS/cm 2 )
+g p
≠g p
+g p
≠g p
≠Da
Vm
(mV)
+Da
Figure 2: Response to a sensory related phasic input in rewarded and unrewarded
trials. (A) g t + g p > g D!U . (B) g t + g p < g 
s .
An important feature of the model is that operational curves for all values of  inter-
sect at a unique point, indicated by a circle in Fig 1B, for which V 
m = 55:1 mV
and g 
s = 13:2 S=cm 2 . The appearance of this critical point is due to a per-
fect cancellation between the IRK and the L-Ca currents; it arises as a solution
to the equation I IRK + I L Ca = 0. When this condition is satised, solutions
to Eq 3 become independent of . The existence of a critical point at a slightly
more depolarized membrane potential than the ring threshold at V f = 58 mV
is an important aspect of our model; it plays a role in the mechanism that allows
dopamine to either enhance or depress the response of the model spiny neuron.
The dynamical evolution of Vm due to changes in both g s and  follows from Eq 1.
Consider a scenario in which a tonic input g t maintains Vm below V f ; the response to
an additional phasic input g p su∆cient to drive Vm above V f depends on whether it
is associated with expected reward and thus triggers dopamine release. The response
of the model neuron depends on the combined synaptic input g s in a manner that is
critically dependent on the expectation of reward. We consider two cases: whether
g s exceeds g D!U (Fig 2A) or remains below g 
s (Fig 2B).
If the phasic input is not associated with reward, the dopamine level does not in-
crease (left panels in Fig 2). The square on the operational curve for  = 1 (dotted
line) indicates the equilibrium state corresponding to g t . A rapid increase from
g s = g t to g s = g t + g p (rightward solid arrow) is followed by an increase in Vm
towards its equilibrium value (upward dotted arrow). When the phasic input is
removed (leftward solid arrow), Vm decreases to its initial equilibrium value (down-

No Response
supressed
enhanced
amplitude
enhanced
amplitude
and
duration
0 7.5
0
7.5
g
g D U
g* s
g t
(µS/cm
2
)
g p (µS/cm 2 )
g f g D
U
g* s
g U
D
Figure 3: Modulation
of response in high
dopamine relative to
low dopamine conditions
as a function of the
strength of phasic and
tonic inputs.
ward dotted arrow). In unrewarded trials, the only dierence between a larger and
a smaller phasic input is that the former results in a more depolarized membrane
potential and thus a higher ring rate. The ring activity, which ceases when the
phasic input disappears, encodes for the strength of the sensory-related stimulus.
Rewarded trials (right panels in Fig 2) elicit qualitatively dierent responses. The
phasic input is the conditioned stimulus that triggers dopamine release in the stria-
tum, and the operational curve switches from the  = 1 (dotted) curve to the
bistable  = 1:4 (solid) curve. The consequences of this switch depend on the
strength of the phasic input. If g s exceeds the value for the D!U transition (Fig
2A), Vm depolarizes towards the upper branch of the bistable operational curve.
This additional depolarization results in a noticeably higher ring rate than the
one elicited by the same input in an unrewarded trial (Fig 2A, left panel). When
the phasic input is removed, the unit hyperpolarizes slightly as it reaches the upper
branch of the bistable operational curve. If g t exceeds g U!D , the unit remains in
the up state until  decreases towards its baseline level. If this condition is met
in a rewarded trial, the response is not only larger in amplitude but also longer in
duration. In contrast to these enhancements, if g s is not su∆cient to exceed g 
s (Fig
2B), Vm hyperpolarizes towards the lower branch of the bistable operational curve.
The unit remains in the down state until  decreases towards its baseline level. In
this type of rewarded trial, dopamine suppresses the response of the unit.
The analysis presented above provides an explanatory mechanism for the obser-
vation of either enhanced or suppressed spiny neuron activity in the presence of
dopamine. It is the strength of the total synaptic input that selects between these
two eects; the generic features of their dierentiation are summarized in Fig 3.
Enhancement occurs whenever the condition g s > g D!U is met, while activity is
suppressed if g s < g 
s . The separatrix between enhancement and suppression al-
ways lies in a narrow band limited by g s = gD!U and g s = g 
s . Its precise location
will depend on the details of the temporal evolution of  as it rises and returns to
baseline. But whatever the shape of (t) might be, there will be a range of values
of g s for which activity is suppressed, and a range of values of g s for which activity
is enhanced.
4 Information processing
Dopamine induced bistability improves the ability of the model spiny neuron to de-
tect time correlated sensory-related inputs relative to a context-related background.
To illustrate this eect, consider g s = (g t + g p ) as a random variable. The multi-
plicative noise is Gaussian, with <>= 1 and < 2 >= 1:038. The total probability

density function (PDF) shown in Fig 4A for g t = 9:2 S=cm 2 consists of two PDFs
corresponding to g p = 0 (left; black line) and g p = 5:8 S=cm 2 (right; grey line).
These two values of g p occur with equal prior probability; time correlations are
introduced through a repeat probability p r of retaining the current value of g p in
the subsequent time step. The total PDF shown in Fig 4A does not depend on the
value of p r . Performance at the task of detecting the sensory-related input (g p 6= 0)
is limited by the overlap of the corresponding PDFs [9]; optimal separation of the
two PDFs in Fig 4A results in a Bayesian error of 10.46%.
0 15 30
g s (µS/cm 2 )
g s =xg t
g s =x(g +g p )
A
≠90 ≠60 ≠30
V m (mV)
B
≠90 ≠60 ≠30
V m (mV)
C
≠90 ≠60 ≠30
V m (mV)
D
Figure 4: Probability density functions for (A) synaptic input, (B) membrane poten-
tial at  = 1, (C) membrane potential at  = 1:4 for uncorrelated inputs (p r = 0:5),
and (D) membrane potential at  = 1:4 for correlated inputs (p r = 0:975).
The transformation of g s into Vm through the  = 1 operational curve results in
the PDFs shown in Fig 4B; here again, the total PDF does not depend on p r .
An increase in the separation of the two peaks indicates an improved signal-to-
noise ratio, but an extension in the tails of the PDFs counteracts this eect: the
Bayesian error stays at 10.46%, in agreement with theoretical predictions [9] that
hold for any strictly monotonic map from g s into Vm . For the  = 1:4 operational
curve, the PDFs that characterize Vm depend on p r and are shown in Fig 4C
(p r = 0:5, for which g p is independently drawn from its prior in each time step) and
4D (p r = 0:975, which describes phasic input persistance for about 400 ms). The
implementation of Bayesian optimal detection of g p 6= 0 for  = 1:4 requires three
separating boundaries; the corresponding Bayesian errors stand at 10.46% for Fig
4C and 4.23% for Fig 4D. A single separating boundary in the gap between the two
stable branches is suboptimal, but is easily implementable by the bistable neuron.
This strategy leads to detection errors of 20.06% for Fig 4C and 4.38% for Fig 4D.
Note that the Bayesian error decreases only when time correlations are included,
and that in this case, detection based on a single separating boundary is very close
to optimal. The results for  = 1:4 clearly indicate that ambiguities in the bistable
region make it harder to identify temporally uncorrelated instances of g p 6= 0 on
the basis of a single separating boundary (Fig 4C), while performance improves if
instances with g p 6= 0 are correlated over time (Fig 4D). Bistability thus provides a
mechanism for improved detection of time correlated input signals.
5 Conclusions
The model presented here incorporates the most relevant eects of dopamine neu-
romodulation of striatal medium spiny neurons via D1 receptor activation. In the
absence of dopamine the model reproduces the bimodal character of medium spiny
neurons [5]. In the presence of dopamine, the model undergoes a bifurcation and
becomes bistable. This qualitative change in character provides a mechanism to
account for both enhancement and depression of spiny neuron discharge in response
to inputs associated with expectation of reward. There is only limited direct ex-
perimental evidence of bistability in the membrane potential of spiny neurons: the

sustained depolarization observed in vitro following brief current injection in the
presence of D1 agonists [4] is a hallmark of bistable responsiveness.
The activity of single striatal spiny neurons recorded in a memory guided saccade
task [1] is strongly modulated by the expectation of reward as reinforcement for cor-
rect performance. In these experiments, most units show a more intense response of
longer duration to the presentation of visual stimuli indicative of upcoming reward;
a few units show instead suppressed activity. These observations are consistent
with properties of the model neuron, which is capable of both types of response to
such stimuli. The model identies the strength of the total excitatory cortical input
as the experimental parameter that selects between these two response types, and
suggests that enhanced responses can have a range of amplitudes but attenuated
responses result in an almost complete suppression of activity, in agreement with
experimental data [1].
Bistability provides a gain mechanism that nonlinearly amplies both the intensity
and duration of striatal activity. This amplication, exported through thalamo-
cortical pathways, may provide a mechanism for the preferential cortical encoding of
salient information related to reward acquisition. The model indicates that through
the activation of D1 receptors, dopamine can temporarily desensitize spiny neurons
to weak inputs while simultaneously sensitizing spiny neurons to large inputs. A
computational advantage of this mechanism is the potential adaptability of signal
modulation: the brain may be able to utilize the demonstrated plasticity of cortico-
striatal synapses so that dopamine release preferentially enhances salient signals
related to reward. This selective enhancement of striatal activity would result in a
more informative eerent signal related to achieving reward.
At the systems level, dopamine plays a signicant role in the normal operation
of the brain, as evident in the severe cognitive and motor decits associated with
pathologies of the dopamine system (e.g. Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia). Yet at
the cellular level, the eect of dopamine on the physiology of neurons seems modest.
In our model, a small increase in the magnitude of both IRK and L-Ca currents
elicited by D1 receptor activation su∆ces to switch the character of spiny neurons
from bimodal to truly bistable, which not only modulates the frequency of neural
responses but also introduces a state dependence and a temporal eect. Other
models have suggested that dopamine modulates contrast [9], but the temporal
eect is a novel aspect that plays an important role in information processing.
6 References
[1] Kawagoe R, Takikawa Y, Hikosaka O (1998). Nature Neurosci 1:411-416.
[2] Schultz W (1998). J Neurophysiol 80:1-27.
[3] Nicola SM, Surmeier DJ, Malenka RC (2000). Annu Rev Neurosci 23:185-215.
[4] Hernandez-Lopez S, Bargas J, Surmeier DJ, Reyes A, Gallarraga E (1997). J Neurosci
17:3334-42.
[5] Wilson CJ, Kawaguchi Y (1996). J Neurosci 7:2397-2410.
[6] Hille B (1992) Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes. Sinauer Ass., Sunderland MA.
[7] Pacheco-Cano MT, Bargas J, Hernandez-Lopez S (1996). Exp Brain Res 110:205-211.
[8] Surmeier DJ, Bargas J, Hemmings HC, Nairn AC, Greengard P (1995). Neuron 14:385-
397.
[9] Servan-Schreiber D, Printz H, Cohen JD (1990). Science 249:892-895.

