An Information Theoretic Approach to the Functional Classification of Neurons

Elad Schneidman,1,

1

2 William Bialek,1 and Michael J. Berry II2

Department of Physics and Department of Molecular Biology Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544, USA {elads,wbialek,berry}@princeton.edu 2

Abstract A population of neurons typically exhibits a broad diversity of responses to sensory inputs. The intuitive notion of functional classification is that cells can be clustered so that most of the diversity is captured by the identity of the clusters rather than by individuals within clusters. We show how this intuition can be made precise using information theory, without any need to introduce a metric on the space of stimuli or responses. Applied to the retinal ganglion cells of the salamander, this approach recovers classical results, but also provides clear evidence for subclasses beyond those identified previously. Further, we find that each of the ganglion cells is functionally unique, and that even within the same subclass only a few spikes are needed to reliably distinguish between cells.

1 Introduction Neurons exhibit an enormous variety of shapes and molecular compositions. Already in his classical work, Cajal [1] recognized that the shapes of cells can be classified, and he identified many of the cell types that we recognize today. Such classification is fundamentally important, because it implies that instead of having to describe 1012 individual neurons, a mature neuroscience might need to deal only with a few thousand different classes of nominally identical neurons. There are three broad methods of classification: morphological, molecular, and functional. Morphological and molecular classification are appealing because they deal with relatively fixed properties, but ultimately the functional properties of neurons are the most important, and neurons that share the same morphology or molecular markers need not embody the same function. With attention to arbitrary detail, every neuron will be individual, while a coarser view might overlook an important distinction; a quantitative formulation of the classification problem is essential. The vertebrate retina is an attractive example: its anatomy is well studied and highly ordered, containing repeated micro-circuits that look out at different angles in visual space [1, 2, 3]; its overall function (vision) is clear, giving the experimenter better intuition about relevant stimuli; and responses of many of its output neurons, ganglion cells, can be recorded simultaneously using a multi-electrode array, allowing greater control of experimental variables than possible with serial recordings [4]. Here we exploit this favorable experimental situation to highlight the mathematical questions that must lie behind any attempt at classification.


Functional classification of retinal ganglion cells typically has consisted of finding qualitatively different responses to simple stimuli. Classes are defined by whether ganglion cells fire spikes at the onset or offset of a step of light or both (ON, OFF, ON/OFF cells in frog [5]) or whether they fire once or twice per cycle of a drifting grating (X, Y cells in cat [6]). Further elaborations exist. In the frog, the literature reports 1 class of ON-type ganglion cell and 4 or 5 classes of OFF-type [7]. The salamander has been reported to have only 3 of these OFF-type ganglion cells [8]. The classes have been distinguished using stimuli such as diffuse flashes of light, moving bars, and moving spots. The results are similar to earlier work using more exotic stimuli [9]. In some cases, there is very close agreement between anatomical and functional classes, such as the (,) and (Y,X) cells in the cat. However, the link between anatomy and function is not always so clear. Here we show how information theory allows us to define the problem of classification without any a priori assumptions regarding which features of visual stimulus or neural response are most significant, and without imposing a metric on these variables. All notions of similarity emerge from the joint statistics of neurons in a population as they respond to common stimuli. To the extent that we identify the function of retinal ganglion cells as providing the brain with information about the visual world, then our approach finds exactly the classification which captures this functionality in a maximally efficient manner. Applied to experiments on the tiger salamander retina, this method identifies the major types of ganglion cells in agreement with traditional methods, but on a finer level we find clear structure within a group of 19 fast OFF cells that suggests at least 5 functional subclasses. More profoundly, even cells within a subclass are very different from one another, so that on average the ganglion cell responses to the simplified visual stimuli we have used provide 6 bits/sec of information about cell identity within our population of 21 cells. This is sufficient to identify uniquely each neuron in an "elementary patch" of the retina within one second, and a typical pair of cells can be distinguished reliably by observing an average of just two or three spikes.

2 Theory Suppose that we could give a complete characterization, for each neuron i = 1, 2, ··· , N in a population, of the probability P(r|s, i) that a stimulus s will generate the response r. Traditional approaches to functional classification introduce (implicitly or explicitly) a parametric representation for the distributions P(r|s, i) and then search for clusters in this parameter space. For visual neurons we might assume that responses are determined by the projection of the stimulus movie s onto a single template or receptive field fi, P(r|s, i) = F (r; fi·s); classifying neurons then amounts to clustering the receptive fields. But it is not possible to cluster without specifying what it means for these vectors to be similar; in this case, since the vectors come from the space of stimuli, we need a metric or distortion measure on the stimuli themselves. It seems strange that classifying the responses of visual neurons requires us to say in advance what it means for images or movies to be similar.1 Information theory suggests a formulation that does not require us to measure similarity among either stimuli or responses. Imagine that we present a stimulus s and record the response r from a single neuron in the population, but we don't know which one. This response tells us something about the identity of the cell, and on average this can be quantified

1 If all cells are selective for a small number of commensurate features, then the set of vectors fi

must lie on a low dimensional manifold, and we can use this selectivity to guide the clustering. But we still face the problem of defining similarity: even if all the receptive fields in the retina can be summarized meaningfully by the diameters of the center and surround (for example), why should we believe that Euclidean distance in this two dimensional space is a sensible metric?


as the mutual information between responses and identity (conditional on the stimulus),

N

I(r; i|s) = 1 N P (r|s, i) log2

N i=1

P (r|s, i) P (r|s) bits, (1)

i=1 r

where P(r|s) = (1/N) P (r|s, i). The mutual information I(r; i|s) measures the

extent to which different cells in the population produce reliably distinguishable responses to the same stimulus; from Shannon's classical arguments [10] this is the unique measure of these correlations which is consistent with simple and plausible constraints. It is natural to ask this question on average in an ensemble of stimuli P(s) (ideally the natural ensemble),

N

I(r; i|s) s = 1 N [ds]P (s)P (r|s, i) log2 P (r|s, i) P (r|s) ; (2)

i=1

I(r; i|s) s is invariant under all invertible transformations of r or s.

Because information is mutual, we also can think of I(r; i|s) s as the information that

cellular identity provides about the responses we will record. But now it is clear what we mean by classifying the cells: If there are clear classes, then we can predict the responses to a stimulus just by knowing the class to which a neuron belongs rather than knowing its unique identity. Thus we should be able to find a mapping i  C of cells into classes C = 1, 2, ··· , K such that I(r; C|s) is almost as large as I(r; i|s) , despite the fact

s s

that the number of classes K is much less than the number of cells N. Optimal classifications are those which use the K different class labels to capture as much information as possible about the stimulus-response relation, maximizing I(r; C|s)

s at

fixed K. More generally we can consider soft classifications, described by probabilities P (C|i) of assigning each cell to a class, in which case we would like to capture as much information as possible about the stimulus-response relation while constraining the amount of information that class labels provide directly about identity, I(C; i). In this case our optimization problem becomes, with  as a Lagrange multiplier, max [ I(r; C|s) - I(C;i)]. (3) This is a generalization of the information bottleneck problem [11]. Here we confine ourselves to hard classifications, and use a greedy agglomerative algorithm [12] which starts with K = N and makes mergers which at every step provide the smallest reduction in I(r; C|s). This information loss on merging cells (or clusters) i and j is given by D(i, j)  Iij(r; C|s) = DJS[P (r|s, i)||P (r|s, j)] , (4) where DJS is the Jensen­Shannon divergence [13] between the two distributions, or equivalently the information that one sample provides about its source distribution in the case of just these two alternatives. The matrix of "distances" Iij characterizes the similarities among neurons in pairwise fashion. Finally, if cells belong to clear classes, then we ought to be able to replace each cell by a typical or average member of the class without sacrificing function. In this case function is quantified by asking how much information cells provide about the visual scene. There is a strict complementarity of the information measures: information that the stimulus/response relation provides about the identity of the cell is exactly information about the visual scene which will be lost if we don't know the identity of the cells [14]. Our information theoretic

s P (C|i)

s


approach to classification of neurons thus produces classes such that replacing cells with average class members provides the smallest loss of information about the sensory inputs.

3 The responses of retinal ganglion cells to identical stimuli We recorded simultaneously 21 retinal ganglion cells from the salamander using a multielectrode array.2 The visual stimulus consisted of 100 repeats of a 20 s segment of spatially uniform flicker (see fig. 1a), in which light intensity values were randomly selected every 30 ms from a Gaussian distribution having a mean of 4 mW/mm2 and an RMS contrast of 18%. Thus, the photoreceptors were presented with exactly the same visual stimulus, and the movie is many correlation times in duration, so we can replace averages over stimuli by averages over time (ergodicity). A 3 s sample of the ganglion cell's responses to the visual stimulus is shown in Fig. 1b. There are times when many of the cells fire together, while at other times only a subset of these cells is active. Importantly, the same neuron may be part of different active groups at different times. a b

time

500 ms

(bits/s)

rate

Information

c 20 15 10 5 0 0

10

(spikes/s) 5 contrast

rate

mean

firing

0 10 20

d 0.2 0.1 0 -0.1 -0.2 -300

-200 -100 0

cell rank order (by rate) time relative to spike (ms)

Figure 1: Responses of salamander ganglion cells to modulated uniform field intensity. a: The retina is presented with a series of uniform intensity "images". The intensity modulation is Gaussian white noise distributed. b: A 3 sec segment of the (concurrent) responses of 21 ganglion cells to repeated presentation of the stimulus. The rasters are ordered from bottom to top according to the average firing rate of the neurons (over the whole movie). c: Firing rate and Information rates of the different cells as a function of their rank, ordered by their firing rate. d: The average stimulus pattern preceding a spike for each of the different cells. Traditionally, these would be classified as 1 ON cell, 1 slow-OFF cell and 19 fast-OFF cells. On a finer time scale than shown here, the latency of the responses of the single neurons and their spiking patterns differ across time. To analyze the responses of the different

2 The retina is isolated from the eye of the larval tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum) and per-

fused in Ringer's medium. Action potentials were measured extracellularly using a multi-electrode array [4], while light was projected from a computer monitor onto the photoreceptor layer. Because erroneously sorted spikes would strongly effect our results, we were very conservative in our identification of cleanly isolated cells.


neurons, we discretize the spike trains into time bins of size t. We examine the response in windows of time having length T, so that an individual neural response r becomes a binary `word' W with T/t `letters'.3 Since the cells in Fig. 1b are ordered according to their average firing rate, it is clear that there is no `simple' grouping of the cells' responses with respect to this response parameter; firing rates range continuously from 1 to 7 spikes per second (Fig. 1c). Similarly, the rate of information (estimated according to [15]) that the cells encode about the same stimulus also ranges continuously from 3 to 20 bits/s. We estimate the average stimulus pattern preceding a spike for each of the cells, the spike triggered average (STA), shown in Fig. 1d. According to traditional classification based on the STA, one of the cells is an ON cell, one is a slow OFF cells and 19 belong to the fast OFF class [16]. While it may be possible to separate the 19 waveforms of the fast OFF cells into subgroups, this requires assumptions about what stimulus features are important. Furthermore, there is no clear standard for ending such subclassification. 4 Clustering of the ganglion cells responses into functional types To classify these ganglion cells, we solved the information theoretic optimization problem described above. Figure 2a shows the pairwise distances D(i, j) among the 21 cells, ordered by their average firing rates; again, firing rate alone does not cluster the cells. The result of the greedy clustering of the cells is shown by a binary dendrogram in Fig. 2b.

a 5 10 15 20

bits/s 4 b

2

3 1.5

(bits/s)

2 1

1 distance 0.5

0

5 10 15 20 0

d

13 14 15 7 3 8 1216 201718 10 11 2 5 6 9 19 21 1 4

information identity

about

normalized

c 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 00

bits/s 4

1x10ms 2x5ms 5x2ms 1x10ms nn

5 10 15 20

3

2

1

0

5 10 15 20 5 10 15 20 number of clusters

Figure 2: Clustering ganglion cell responses. a: Average distances between the cells responses; cells are ordered by their average firing rate. b: Dendrogram of cell clustering. Cell names correspond to their firing rate rank. The height of a merge reflects the distance between merged elements. c: The information that the cells' responses convey about the clusters in every stage of the clustering in (b), normalized to the total information that the responses convey about cell identity. Using different response segment parameters or clustering method (e.g., nearest neighbor) result in very similar behavior. d: reordering of the distance matrix in (a) according to the tree structure given in (b). The greedy agglomerative approximation [12] starts from every cell as a single cluster. We iteratively merge the clusters ci and cj which have the minimal value of D(ci, cj)

3 As any fixed choice of T and t is arbitrary, we explore a range of these parameters.


and display this distance or information loss as the height of the merger in Fig. 2b. We pool their spike trains together as the responses of the new cell class. We now re-estimate the distances between clusters and repeat the procedure, until we get a single cluster that contains all cells. Fig. 2c shows the compression in information achieved by each of the mergers: for each number of clusters, we plot the mutual information between the clusters and the responses, I(r; C|s) , normalized by the information that the response conveys about the full set of cells, I(r; i|s) . The clustering structure and the information curve in Fig. 2c are robust (up to one cell difference in the final dendrogram) to changes in the word size and bin size used; we even obtain the same results with a nearest neighbor clustering based on D(i, j). This suggests that the top 7 mergers in Fig. 2b (which correspond to the bottom 7 points in panel c) are of significantly different subgroups. Two of these mergers, which correspond to the rightmost branches of the dendrogram, separate out the ON and slow OFF cells. The remaining 5 clusters are subclasses of fast OFF cells. However, Fig. 2d which shows the dissimilarity matrix from panel a, reordered by the result of the clustering, demonstrates that while there is clear structure within the cell population, the subclasses there are not sharply distinct. How many types are there? While one might be happy with classifying the fast OFF cells into 5 subclasses, we further asked whether the cells within a subclass are reliably distinguishable from one another; that is, are the bottom mergers in Fig. 2b-c significant? To this end we randomly split each of the 21 cells into 2 halves (of 50 repeats each), or `siblings', and re-clustered. Figure 3a shows the resulting dendrogram of this clustering, indicating that the cells are reliably distinguishable from one another: The nearest neighbor of each new half­cell is its own sibling, and (almost) all of the first layer mergers are of the corresponding siblings (the only mismatch is of a sibling merging with a neighboring full cell and then with the other sibling). Figure 3b shows the very different cumulative probability distributions of pairwise distances among the parent cells and that of the distances between siblings. a b

s

s

2 1

0.8 1.5

"siblings" all pairs

(bits/s) 0.6

distribution 1

0.4 distance

0.5 cumulative

4

0.2 9 18

12 5 6 15

14 13 8 16 2017 10 11 19 21 1

2 7 3

0 0 0.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 1 2 3 4

average distance between cells (bits/s)

Figure 3: Every cell is different from the others. a: Clustering of cell responses after randomly splitting every cell into 2 "siblings". The nearest neighbor of each of the new cells is its sibling and (except for one case) so is the first merge. From the second level upwards, the tree is identical to Fig. 2b (up to symmetry of tree plotting). b: Cumulative distribution of pairwise distances between cells. The distances between siblings are easily discriminated from the continuous distribution of values of all the (real) cells.

How significant are the differences between the cells? It might be that cells are distinguishable, but only after observing their responses for very long times. Since 1 bit is needed to reliably distinguish between a pair of cells, Fig. 3b


shows that more than 90% of the pairs are reliably distinguishable within 2 seconds or less. This result is especially striking given the low mean spike rate of these cells; clearly, at times where none of the cells is spiking, it is impossible to distinguish between them. To place the information about identity on an absolute scale, we compare it to the entropy of the responses at each time, using 10 ms segments of the responses at each time during the stimulus (Fig. 4a). Most of the points lie close to the origin, but many of them reflect discrete times when the responses of the neurons are very different and hence highly informative about cell identity: under the conditions of our experiment, roughly 30% of the response variability among cells is informative about their identity.4 On average observing a single neural response gives about 6 bits/s about the identity of the cells within this population. We also computed the average number of spikes per cell which we need to observe to distinguish reliably between cells i and j,

nd(i, j) = 1 2 (r¯i + r¯j) . D(i, j) (5)

where r¯i is the average spike rate of cell i in the experiment. Figure 4b shows the cumulative probability distribution of the values of nd. Evidently, more than 80% of the pairs are reliably distinguishable after observing, on average, only 3 spikes from one of the neurons. Since ganglion cells fire in bursts, this suggest that most cells are reliably distinguishable based on a single firing `event'! We also show that for the 11 most similar cells (those in the left subtree in Fig. 2b) only a few more spikes, or one extra firing event, are required to reliably distinguish them.

a b 1

(bits)

1

in 0.8 0.8

all pairs identity

segment

about

0.6 0.4

0.6 subtree pairs

distribution

0.4

response 0.2 cumulative 0.2

ms information

10 0 0

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0.5 1 2 3 4 5 10 20 30

entropy of 10 ms response segments (bits) nd (spikes)

Figure 4: High diversity among cells. a: The average information that a response segment conveys about the identity of the cell as a function of the entropy of the responses. Every point stands for a time point along the stimulus. Results shown are for 2-letter words of 5 ms bins; similar behavior is observed for different word sizes and bins b: Cumulative distribution of the average number of spikes that are needed to distinguish between pair of cells.

5 Discussion We have identified a diversity of functional types of retinal ganglion cells by clustering them to preserve information about their identity. Beyond the easy classification of the major types of salamander ganglion cells ­ fast OFF, slow OFF, and ON ­ in agreement with traditional methods, we have found clear structure within the fast OFF cells that suggests at least 5 more functional classes. Furthermore, we found evidence that each cell is functionally unique. Even under this relatively simple stimulus, the analysis revealed that the

4 Since the cells receive the same stimulus and often possess shared circuitry, an efficiency as high

as 100% is very unlikely.


cell responses convey 6 bits/s of information about cell identity within this population of 21 cells. Ganglion cells in the salamander interact with each other and collect information from a 250 µm radius; given the density of ganglion cells, the observed rate implies that a single ganglion cell can be discriminated from all the cells in this "elementary patch" within 1 s. This is a surprising degree of diversity, given that 19 cells in our sample would be traditionally viewed as nominally the same. One might wonder if our choice of uniform flicker limits the results of our classification. However, we found that this stimulus was rich enough to distinguish every ganglion cell in our data set. It is likely that stimuli with spatial structure would reveal further differences. Using a larger collection of cells will enable us to explore the possibility that there is a continuum of unique functional units in the retina. How might the brain make use of this diversity? Several alternatives are conceivable. By comparing the spiking of closely related cells, it might be possible to achieve much finer discrimination among stimuli that tend to activate both cells. Diversity also can improve the robustness of retinal signalling: as the retina is constantly setting its adaptive state in response to statistics of the environment that it cannot estimate without some noise, maintaining functional diversity can guard against adaptation that overshoots its optimum. Finally, great functional diversity opens up additional possibilities for learning strategies, in which downstream neurons select the most useful of its inputs rather than merely summing over identical inputs to reduce their noise. The example of the invertebrate retina demonstrates that nature can construct neural circuits with almost crystalline reproducibility from synapse to synapse. This suggests that the extreme diversity found here in the vertebrate retina may not be the result of some inevitable sloppiness of neural development but rather as evolutionary selection of a different strategy for representing the visual world. References [1] Cajal, S.R., Histologie du systeme nerveux de l'homme et des vertebres., Paris: Maloine (1911). [2] Dowling, J., The Retina: An Approachable Part of the Brain. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press (1987). [3] Masland, R.H., Nat. Neurosci., 4: 877-886 (2001). [4] Meister, M., Pine, J. & Baylor, D.A., J. Neurosci. Methods. 51: 95-106 (1994). [5] Hartline, H.K., Am. J. Physiol., 121: 400-415 (1937). [6] Hochstein, S. & Shapley, R.M., J. Physiol., 262: 265-84 (1976). [7] Grosser, O.-J. & Grosser-Cornehls, U., in Frog Neurobiology, ed: R. Llinas, Precht, W.: 297-385, Springer-Verlag: New York (1976). [8] Grosser-Cornehls, U. & Himstedt, W., Brain Behav. Evol. 7: 145-168 (1973). [9] Lettvin, J.Y., Maturana, H.R., McCulloch, W.S. & Pitts, W.H., Proc. I.R.E., 47: 1940-51 (1959). [10] Shannon, C. E. & Weaver W. Mathematical theory of communication Univ. of Illinois (1949). [11] Tishby, N., Pereira, F. & Bialek, W., in Proceedings of The 37th Allerton conference on communication, control & computing, Univ. of Illinois (1999). see also arXiv: physics/0004057. [12] Slonim, N. & Tishby, N., NIPS 12, 617­623 (2000). [13] Lin, J., IEEE IT, 37, 145­151 (1991). [14] Schneidman, E., Brenner, N., Tishby N., de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. & Bialek, W. NIPS 13: 159-165 (2001). see also arXiv: physics/0005043. [15] Strong, S.P., Koberle, R., de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. & Bialek, W., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 197­ 200 (1998). see also arXiv: cond-mat/9603127. [16] Keat, J., Reinagel, P., Reid, R.C. & Meister, M., Neuron 30, 803-817 (2001).


