Efficient Learning of Linear Perceptrons
Shai Ben≠David
Department of Computer Science
Technion
Haifa 32000, Israel
shai@cs.technion.ac.il
Hans Ulrich Simon
Fakult®at f®ur Mathematik
Ruhr Universit®at Bochum
D≠44780 Bochum, Germany
simon@lmi.ruhr≠uni≠bochum.de
Abstract
We consider the existence of efficient algorithms for learning the
class of half≠spaces in ! n in the agnostic learning model (i.e., mak≠
ing no prior assumptions on the example≠generating distribution).
The resulting combinatorial problem ≠ finding the best agreement
half≠space over an input sample ≠ is NP hard to approximate to
within some constant factor. We suggest a way to circumvent this
theoretical bound by introducing a new measure of success for such
algorithms. An algorithm is Ø≠margin successful if the agreement
ratio of the half≠space it outputs is as good as that of any half≠space
once training points that are inside the Ø≠margins of its separating
hyper≠plane are disregarded. We prove crisp computational com≠
plexity results with respect to this success measure: On one hand,
for every positive Ø, there exist efficient (poly≠time) Ø≠margin suc≠
cessful learning algorithms. On the other hand, we prove that
unless P=NP, there is no algorithm that runs in time polynomial
in the sample size and in 1=Ø that is Ø≠margin successful for all
Ø ? 0.
1 Introduction
We consider the computational complexity of learning linear perceptrons for arbi≠
trary (i.e. non ≠separable) data sets. While there are quite a few perceptron learning
algorithms that are computationally efficient on separable input samples, it is clear
that `real≠life' data sets are usually not linearly separable. The task of finding a lin≠
ear perceptron (i.e. a half≠space) that maximizes the number of correctly classified
points for an arbitrary input labeled sample is known to be NP≠hard. Furthermore,
even the task of finding a half≠space whose success rate on the sample is within
some constant ratio of an optimal one is NP≠hard [1].
A possible way around this problem is offered by the support vector machines
paradigm (SVM) . In a nutshell, the SVM idea is to replace the search for a linear
separator in the feature space of the input sample, by first embedding the sample
into a Euclidean space of much higher dimension, so that the images of the sample
points do become separable, and then applying learning algorithms to the image
of the original sample. The SVM paradigm enjoys an impressive practical success,
however, it can be shown ([3]) that there are cases in which such embeddings are

bound to require high dimension and allow only small margins, which in turn entails
the collapse of the known generalization performance guarantees for such learning.
We take a different approach. While sticking with the basic empirical risk mini≠
mization principle, we propose to replace the worst≠case≠performance analysis by an
alternative measure of success. The common definition of the approximation ratio
of an algorithm, requires the profit of an algorithm to remain within some fixed
ratio from that of an optimal solution for all inputs, we allow the relative quality
of our algorithm to vary between different inputs. For a given input sample, the
number of points that the algorithm's output half≠space should classify correctly
relates not only to the success rate of the best possible half≠space, but also to the
robustness of this rate to perturbations of the hyper≠plane. This new success re≠
quirement is intended to provide a formal measure that, while being achievable by
efficient algorithms, retains a guaranteed quality of the output `whenever possible'.
The new success measure depends on a margin parameter Ø. An algorithm is
called Ø≠margin successful if, for any input labeled sample, it outputs a hypothesis
half≠space that classifies correctly as many sample points as any half≠space can
classify correctly with margin Ø (that is, discounting points that are too close to
the separating hyper≠plane).
Consequently, a Ø≠margin successful algorithm is required to output a hypothesis
with close≠to≠optimal performance on the input data (optimal in terms of the num≠
ber of correctly classified sample points), whenever this input sample has an optimal
separating hyper≠plane that achieves larger≠than≠Ø margins for most of the points
it classifies correctly. On the other hand, if for every hyper≠plane h that achieves
close≠to≠maximal number of correctly classified input points, a large percentage of
the correctly classified points are close to h's boundary, then an algorithm can settle
for a relatively poor success ratio without violating the Ø≠margin success criterion.
We obtain a crisp analysis of the computational complexity of perceptron learning
under the Ø≠margin success requirement:
On one hand, for every Ø ? 0 we present an efficient Ø≠margin
successful learning algorithm (that is, an algorithm that runs in
time polynomial in both the input dimension and the sample size).
On the other hand, unless P=NP, no algorithm whose running time
is polynomial in the sample size and dimension and in 1=Ø can be
Ø≠margin successful for all Ø ? 0.
Note, that by the hardness of approximating linear perceptrons result of [1] cited
above, for Ø = 0, Ø≠margin learning is NP hard (even NP≠hard to approximate).
We conclude that the new success criterion for learning algorithms provides a rigor≠
ous success guarantee that captures the constraints imposed on perceptron learning
by computational efficiency requirements.
It is well known by now that margins play an important role in the analysis of genera≠
lization performance (or sample complexity). The results of this work demonstrate
that a similar notion of margins is a significant component in the determination of
the computational complexity of learning as well.
Due to lack of space, in this extended abstract we skip all the technical proofs.

2 Definition and Notation
We shall be interested in the problem of finding a half≠space that maximizes the
agreement with a given labeled input data set. More formally,
Best Separating Hyper≠plane (BSH) Inputs are of the form (n; S), where n ñ
1, and S = f(x 1 ; j 1 ); : : : ; (x m ; jm )g is finite labeled sample, that is, each x i
is a point in ! n and each j i is a member of f+1; \Gamma1g. A hyper≠plane h(w; t),
where w 2 ! n and t 2 !, correctly classifies (x; j) if sign(! wx ? \Gammat) = j
where ! wx ? denotes the dot product of the vectors w and x.
We define the profit of h = h(w; t) on S as
profit(hjS) = jf(x i ; j i ) : h correctly classifies (x i ; j i )gj
jSj
The goal of a Best Separating Hyper≠plane algorithm is to find a pair (w; t)
so that profit(h(w; t)jS) is as large as possible.
In the sequel, we refer to an input instance with parameter n as a n≠dimensional
input.
On top of the Best Separating Hyper≠plane problem we shall also refer to the fol≠
lowing combinatorial optimization problems:
Best separating Homogeneous Hyper≠plane (BSHH) -- The same problem
as BSH, except that the separating hyper≠plane must be homogeneous,
that is, t must be set to zero. The restriction of BSHH to input points from
S n\Gamma1 , the unit sphere in ! n , is called Best Separating Hemisphere Problem
(BSHem) in the sequel.
Densest Hemisphere (DHem) Inputs are of the form (n; P ), where n ñ 1 and
P is a list of (not necessarily different) points from S n\Gamma1 ≠ the unit sphere
in ! n . The problem is to find the Densest Hemisphere for P , that is, a
weight vector w 2 ! n such that H+ (w; 0) contains as many points from P
as possible (accounting for their multiplicity in P ).
Densest Open Ball (DOB) Inputs are of the form (n; P ), where n ñ 1, and P
is a list of points from ! n . The problem is to find the Densest Open Ball of
radius 1 for P , that is, a center z 2 ! n such that B(z; 1) contains as many
points from P as possible (accounting for their multiplicity in P ).
For the sake of our proofs, we shall also have to address the following well studied
optimization problem:
MAX≠E2≠SAT Inputs are of the form (n; C), where n ñ 1 and C is a collection of
2≠clauses over n Boolean variables. The problem is to find an assignment
a 2 f0; 1g n satisfying as many 2≠clauses of C as possible.
More generally, a maximization problem defines for each input instance I a set
of legal solutions, and for each (instance, legal≠solution) pair (I ; oe), it defines
profit(I ; oe) 2 ! + -- the profit of oe on I .
For each maximization problem \Pi and each input instance I for \Pi, opt \Pi (I) denotes
the maximum profit that can be realized by a legal solution for I . Subscript \Pi is
omitted when this does not cause confusion. The profit realized by an algorithm A
on input instance I is denoted by A(I). The quantity
opt(I) \Gamma A(I)
opt(I)

is called the relative error of algorithm A on input instance I . A is called ffi≠
approximation algorithm for \Pi, where ffi 2 ! + , if its relative error on I is at most ffi
for all input instances I .
2.1 The new notion of approximate optimization: Ø≠margin
approximation
As mentioned in the introduction, we shall discuss a variant of the above common
notion of approximation for the best separating hyper≠plane problem (as well as for
the other geometric maximization problems listed above). The idea behind this new
notion, that we term `Ø≠margin approximation', is that the required approximation
rate varies with the structure of the input sample. When there exist optimal solu≠
tions that are `stable', in the sense that minor variations to these solutions will not
effect their cost, then we require a high approximation ratio. On the other hand,
when all optimal solutions are `unstable' then we settle for lower approximation
ratios.
The following definitions focus on separation problems, but extend to densest set
problems in the obvious way.
Definition 2.1 Given a hypothesis class H = [nHn , where each Hn is a collection
of subsets of ! n , and a parameter Ø ñ 0,
ffl A margin function is a function M : [n (Hn \Theta ! n ) 7! ! + . That is, given
a hypothesis h ae ! n and a point x 2 ! n , M(h;x) is a non≠negative real
number ≠ the margin of x w.r.t. h. In this work, in most cases M(h;x)
is the Euclidean distance between x and the boundary of h, normalized by
jjxjj 2 and, for linear separators, by the 2≠norm of the hyper≠plane h as well.
ffl Given a finite labeled sample S and a hypothesis h 2 Hn , the profit realized
by h on S with margin Ø is
profit(hjS; Ø) = jf(x i ; j i ) : h correctly classifies (x i ; j i ) and M(h;x i ) ñ Øgj
jSj
ffl For a labeled sample S, let opt Ø (S) def = max h2H (profit(hjS; Ø))
ffl h 2 Hn is a Ø≠margin approximation for S w.r.t. H if profit(hjS) ñ
opt Ø (S).
ffl an algorithm A is Ø≠successful for H if for every finite n≠dimensional input
S it outputs A(S) 2 Hn which is a Ø≠margin approximation for S w.r.t. H.
ffl Given any of the geometric maximization problem listed above, \Pi, its Ø≠
relaxation is the problem of finding, for each input instance of \Pi a Ø≠margin
approximation. For a given parameter Ø ? 0, we denote the Ø≠relaxation
of a problem \Pi by \Pi[Ø].
3 Efficient Ø ≠ margin successful learning algorithms
Our Hyper≠plane learning algorithm is based on the following result of Ben≠David,
Eiron and Simon [2]
Theorem 3.1 For every (constant) Ø ? 0, there exists a Ø≠margin successful poly≠
nomial time algorithm AØ for the Densest Open Ball Problem.

We shall now show that the existence of a Ø≠successful algorithm for Densest Open
Balls implies the existence of Ø≠successful algorithms for Densest Hemispheres and
Best Separating Homogeneous Hyper≠planes. Towards this end we need notions of
reductions between combinatorial optimization problems. The first definition, of
a cost preserving polynomial reduction, is standard, whereas the second definition
is tailored for our notion of Ø≠margin success. Once this, somewhat technical,
preliminary stage is over we shall describe our learning algorithms and prove their
performance guarantees.
Definition 3.2 Let \Pi and \Pi 0 be two maximization problems. A cost preserving
polynomial reduction from \Pi to \Pi 0 , written as \Piü cp
pol \Pi 0 consists of the following
components:
ffl a polynomial time computable mapping which maps input instances of \Pi to
input instances of \Pi 0 , so that whenever I is mapped to I 0 , opt(I 0 ) ñ opt(I).
ffl for each I, a polynomial time computable mapping which maps each legal
solutions oe 0 for I 0 to a legal solution oe for I having the same profit that oe 0 .
The following result is evident:
Lemma 3.3 If \Piü cp
pol \Pi 0 and there exists a polynomial time ffi≠approximation algo≠
rithm for \Pi 0 , then there exists a polynomial time ffi≠approximation algorithm for
\Pi.
Claim 3.4 BSHü cp
pol BSHHü cp
pol BSHemü cp
pol DHem.
Proof Sketch: By adding a coordinate one can translate hyper≠planes to homoge≠
neous hyper≠planes (i.e., hyper≠planes that pass through the origin). To get from the
homogeneous hyper≠planes separating problem to the best separating hemisphere
problem, one applies the standard scaling trick. To get from there to the densest
hemisphere problem, one applies the standard reflection trick. ffl
We are interested in Ø≠relaxations of the above problems. We shall therefore in≠
troduce a slight modification of the definition of a cost≠preserving reduction which
makes it applicable to Ø≠relaxed problems.
Definition 3.5 Let \Pi and \Pi 0 be two geometric maximization problems, and
Ø; Ø 0 ? 0. A cost preserving polynomial reduction from \Pi[Ø] to \Pi 0 [Ø 0 ], written
as \Pi[Ø]ü cp
pol \Pi 0 [Ø 0 ], consists of the following components:
ffl a polynomial time computable mapping which maps input instances of \Pi
to input instances of \Pi 0 , so that whenever I is mapped to I 0 , opt Ø 0 (I 0 ) ñ
opt Ø (I).
ffl for each I, a polynomial time computable mapping which maps each legal
solutions oe 0 for I 0 to a legal solution oe for I having the same profit that oe 0 .
The following result is evident:
Lemma 3.6 If \Pi[Ø]ü cp
pol \Pi 0 [Ø 0 ] and there exists a polynomial time Ø≠margin suc≠
cessful algorithm for \Pi, then there exists a polynomial time Ø 0 ≠margin successful
algorithm for \Pi 0 .

Claim 3.7 For every Ø ? 0, BSH[Ø]ü cp
pol BSHH[Ø]ü cp
pol BSHem[Ø]ü cp
pol DHem[Ø].
To conclude our reduction of the Best Separating Hyper≠plane problem to the Dens≠
est open Ball problem we need yet another step.
Lemma 3.8 For Ø ? 0, let Ø 0 = 1 \Gamma
p
1 \Gamma Ø 2 and Ø 00 = Ø 2 =2. Then,
DHem[Ø]ü cp
pol DOB[Ø 0 ]ü cp
pol DOB[Ø 00 ]
The proof is a bit technical and is deferred to the full version of this paper.
Applying Theorem 3.1 and the above reductions, we therefore get:
Theorem 3.9 For each (constant) Ø ? 0, there exists a Ø≠successful polynomial
time algorithm AØ for the Best Separating Hyper≠plane problem.
Clearly, the same result holds for the problems BSHH, DHem and BSHem as well.
Let us conclude by describing the learning algorithms for the BSH (or BSHH)
problem that results from this analysis.
We construct a family (A k ) k2N of polynomial time algorithms. Given a labeled
input sample S, the algorithm A k exhaustively searches through all subsets of S of
size ü k. For each such subset, it computes a hyper≠plane that separates the positive
from the negative points of the subset with maximum margin (if a separating hyper≠
plane exists). The algorithm then computes the number of points in S that each
of these hyper≠planes classifies correctly, and outputs the one that maximizes this
number.
In [2] we prove that our Densest Open Ball algorithm is Ø≠successful for Ø =
1=
p
k \Gamma 1 (when applied to all k≠size subsamples). Applying Lemma 3.8, we may
conclude for problem BSH that, for every k, A k is (4=(k \Gamma 1)) 1=4 ≠successful. In other
words: in order to be Ø≠successful, we must apply algorithm A k for k = 1 + d4=Ø 4 e.
4 NP≠Hardness Results
We conclude this extended abstract by proving some NP≠hardness results that com≠
plement rather tightly the positive results of the previous section. We shall base
our hardness reductions on two known results.
Theorem 4.1 [Höastad, [4]] Assuming P6=NP, for any ffi ! 1=22, there is no
polynomial time ffi≠approximation algorithm for MAX≠E2≠SAT.
Theorem 4.2 [Ben≠David, Eiron and Long, [1]] Assuming P6=NP, for any
ffi ! 3=418, there is no polynomial time ffi≠approximation algorithm for BSH.
Applying Claim 3.4 we readily get:
Corollary 4.3 Assuming P6=NP, for any ffi ! 3=418, there is no polynomial time
ffi≠approximation algorithm for BSHH;BSHem, or DHem.
So far we discussed Ø≠relaxations only for a value of Ø that was fixed regardless
of the input dimension. All the above discussion extends naturally to the case of
dimension≠dependent margin parameter. Let Ø
Ø denote a sequence (Ø 1 ; : : : ; Øn ; : : : ).
For a problem \Pi, its Ø
Ø≠relaxation refers to the problem obtained by considering the
margin value Øn for inputs of dimension n. A main tool for proving hardness is

the notion of Ø
Ø≠legal input instances. An n≠dimensional input sample S is called
Ø
Ø≠legal if the maximal profit on S can be achieved by a hypothesis h \Lambda that satisfies
profit(h \Lambda jS) = profit(h \Lambda jS; Øn ). Note that the Ø
Ø≠relaxation of a problem is NP≠
hard, if the problem restricted to Ø
Ø≠legal input instances is NP≠hard.
Using a special type of reduction, that due to space constrains we cannot elaborate
here, we can show that Theorem 4.1 implies the following:
Theorem 4.4 1. Assuming P6=NP, there is no polynomial time 1=198≠
approximation for BSH even when only 1=
p
36n≠legal input instances are
allowed.
2. Assuming P6=NP, there is no polynomial time 1=198≠approximation for
BSHH even when only 1=
p
45(n + 1)≠legal input instances are allowed.
Using the standard cost preserving reduction chain from BSHH via BSHem to
DHem, and noting that these reductions are obviously margin≠preserving, we get
the following:
Corollary 4.5 Let S be one of the problems BSHH, BSHem, or DHem, and let Ø
Ø
be given by Øn = 1=
p
45(n + 1). Unless P=NP, there exists no polynomial time
1=198≠approximation for S[ØØ]. In particular, the Ø
Ø≠relaxations of these problems are
NP≠hard.
Since the 1=
p
45(n + 1)≠relaxation of the Densest Hemisphere Problem is NP≠hard,
applying Lemma 3.8 we get immediately
Corollary 4.6 The 1
45(n+1) ≠relaxation of the Densest Ball Problem is NP≠hard.
Finally note that Corollaries 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6 rule out the existence of ``strong
schemes'' (A Ø ) with running time of AØ being also polynomial in 1=Ø.
References
[1] Shai Ben≠David, Nadav Eiron, and Philip Long. On the difficulty of approxi≠
mately maximizing agreements. Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Confer≠
ence on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2000), 266≠274.
[2] Shai Ben≠David, Nadav Eiron, and Hans Ulrich Simon. The computational
complexity of densest region detection. Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual
Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2000), 255≠265.
[3] Shai Ben≠David, Nadav Eiron, and Hans Ulrich Simon. Non≠embedability in
Euclidean Half≠Spaces. Technion TR, 2000.
[4] Johan Höastad. Some optimal inapproximability results. In Proceedings of the
29th Annual Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1--10, 1997.

