A silicon primitive for competitive learning
David Hsu Miguel Figueroa Chris Diorio
Computer Science and Engineering
The University of Washington
114 Sieg Hall, Box 352350
Seattle, WA 98195­2350 USA
hsud, miguel, diorio@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
Competitive learning is a technique for training classification and
clustering networks. We have designed and fabricated an 11­
transistor primitive, that we term an automaximizing bump circuit,
that implements competitive learning dynamics. The circuit per­
forms a similarity computation, affords nonvolatile storage, and
implements simultaneous local adaptation and computation. We
show that our primitive is suitable for implementing competitive
learning in VLSI, and demonstrate its effectiveness in a standard
clustering task.
1 In troduct i on
Competitive learning is a family of neural learning algorithms that has proved use­
ful for training many classification and clustering networks [1]. In these networks, a
neuron's synaptic weight vector typically represents a tight cluster of data points.
Upon presentation of a new input to the network, the neuron representing the closest
cluster adapts its weight vector, decreasing the difference between the weight vector
and present input. Details on this adaptation vary for different competitive learning
rules, but the general functionality of the synapse is preserved across various com­
petitive learning networks. These functions are weight storage, similarity computa­
tion, and competitive learning dynamics.
Many VLSI implementations of competitive learning have been reported in the lit­
erature [2]. These circuits typically use digital registers or capacitors for weight
storage. Digital storage is expensive in terms of die area and power consumption;
capacitive storage typically requires a refresh scheme to prevent weight decay. In
addition, these implementations require separate computation and weight­update
phases, increasing complexity. More importantly, neural networks built with these
circuits typically do not adapt during normal operation.
Synapse transistors [3][4] address the problems raised in the previous paragraph.
These devices use the floating­gate technology to provide nonvolatile analog storage
and local adaptation in silicon. The adaptation mechanisms do not perturb the opera­
tion of the device, thus enabling simultaneous adaptation and computation. Unfortu­
nately, the adaptation mechanisms provide dynamics that are difficult to translate

into existing neural­network learning rules. Allen et. al. [5] proposed a silicon com­
petitive learning synapse that used floating gate technology in the early 90's. How­
ever, that approach suffers from asymmetric adaptation due to separate mechanisms
for increasing and decreasing weight values. In addition, they neither characterized
the adaptation dynamics of their device, nor demonstrated competitive learning with
their device.
We present a new silicon primitive, the automaximizing bump circuit, that uses
synapse transistors to implement competitive learning in silicon. This 11­transistor
circuit computes a similarity measure, provides nonvolatile storage, implements
local adaptation, and performs simultaneous adaptation and computation. In addi­
tion, the circuit naturally exhibits competitive learning dynamics. In this paper, we
derive the properties of the automaximizing bump circuit directly from the physics
of synapse transistors, and corroborate our analysis with data measured from a chip
fabricated in a 0.35µm CMOS process. In addition, experiments on a competitive
learning circuit, and software simulations of the learning rule, show that this device
provides a suitable primitive for competitive learning.
2 Synapse trans i s tors
The automaxmizing bump circuit's behavior depends on the storage and adaptation
properties of synapse transistors. Therefore this section briefly reviews these de­
vices. A synapse transistor comprises a floating­gate MOSFET, with a control gate
capacitively coupled to the floating gate, and an associated tunneling implant. The
transistor uses floating­gate charge to implement a nonvolatile analog memory, and
outputs a source current that varies with both the stored value and the control­gate
voltage. The synapse uses two adaptation mechanisms: Fowler­Nordheim tunneling
[6] increases the stored charge; impact­ionized hot­electron injection (IHEI) [7]
decreases the charge. Because tunneling and IHEI can both be active during normal
transistor operation, the synapse enables simultaneous adaptation and computation.
A voltage difference between the floating gate and the tunneling implant causes
electrons to tunnel from the floating gate, through gate oxide, to the tunneling im­
plant. We can approximate this current (with respect to fixed tunneling and floating­
gate voltages, V tun0 and V g0 ) as [4]:
tun fg
( ) /
tun tun0
V V V
I I e D - D
= (1)
where I tun0 and V c are constants that depend on V tun0 and V g0 , and DV tun and DV g are
deviations of the tunneling and floating gate voltages from these fixed levels.
IHEI adds electrons to the floating gate, decreasing its stored charge. The IHEI
current increases with the transistor's source current and drain­to­source voltage;
over a small drain­voltage range, we model this dependence as [3][4]:
sd
1 U / /
inj inj0 s
V V V
I I I e
-
= (2)
where the constant V g depends on the VLSI process, and U t is the thermal voltage.
3 Au tomax i m i z i ng bump c i rcu i t
The automaximizing bump circuit (Fig. 1) is an adaptive version of the classic
bump­antibump circuit [8]. It uses synapse transistors to implement the three essen­
tial functions of a competitive learning synapse: storage of a weight value µ, com­
putation of a similarity measure between the input and µ, and the ability to move µ
closer to the input. Both circuits take two inputs, V 1 and V 2 , and generate three cur­

rents. The two outside currents, I 1 and I 2 , are a measure of the dissimilarity between
the two inputs; the center current, I mid , is a measure of their similarity:
2 1
mid b (1 p'+u # ##
I I V -
+ D
= (3)
where l and k are process and design­dependent parameters, DV is the voltage dif­
ference between V 1 and V 2 , and I b is a bias current. I mid is symmetric with respect to
the difference between V 1 and V 2 , and approximates a Gaussian centered at DV = 0.
We augment the bump­antibump circuit by adding floating gates and tunneling junc­
tions to M1­M5, turning them into synapse transistors; M1 and M3 share the same
floating gate and tunneling junction, as do M2 and M4. We also add transistors M6­
M11 to control IHEI. For convenience, we will refer to our new circuit merely as a
bump circuit. The charge stored on the bump circuit's floating gates, Q 1 and Q 2 ,
shift I mid 's peak away from DV=0 by an amount determined by their difference. We
interpret this difference as the weight, µ, stored by the circuit, and interpret I mid as a
similarity measure between the circuit's input and stored weight.
Tunneling and IHEI adapt the bump circuit's weight. The circuit is automaximizing
because tunneling and IHEI naturally tune the peak of I mid to coincide with the pre­
sent input. This high­level behavior coincides with the dynamics of competitive
learning; both act to decrease the difference between a stored weight and the applied
input. Therefore, no explicit computation of the direction or magnitude of weight
updates is necessary---the circuit naturally performs these computations for us.
Consequently, we only need to indicate when the circuit should adapt, not how it
does adapt. Applying ~10V to V tun and ~0V to V inj activates adaptation. Applying
<8V to V tun and >2V to V inj deactivates adaptation.
3 . 1 We i gh t s t orage
The bump circuit's weight value derives directly from the charge on its floating­
gates. A synapse transistor's floating­gate charge looks, for all practical purposes,
Vdd
V b
V tun
V 1 V 2
I mid
Q 1
Q 2
M1 M2
M3
M4
1
2
M5
V inj
M6
M7
M9
M8
M11 M10
V fg1 V fg2
(a)
V in (V)
I
mid
(A)
µ 1 µ 2 µ 3
­0.5 ­0.4 ­0.3 ­0.2 ­0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1 x 10 ­8
(b)
Figure 1. (a) Automaximizing bump cir­
cuit. M1--M5 form the classic bump­
antibump circuit; we added M6--M11 and
the floating gates. (b) Data showing that
the circuit computes a similarity between
the input, V in , and the stored value, µ , for
three different stored weights. V in is rep­
resented as V 1 =+V in /2, V 2 = -- V in /2.

like a voltage source, V s , applied to the control gate. This voltage source has a value
V s =Q /C in , where C in is the control­gate to floating­gate coupling capacitance and Q
is the floating gate charge. We encode the input to the bump circuit, V in , as a differ­
ential signal: V 1 = V in /2; and V 2 = --V in /2 (similar results will follow for any symmet­
ric encoding of V in ). As a result, I mid computes the similarity between the two float­
ing­gate voltages: V fg1 = V s1 + V in /2, and V fg2 = V s2 -- V in /2 where V s1 and V s2 are the
voltages due to the charge stored on the floating gates. We define the bump circuit's
weight, µ, as:
1
2 s
s V
V -
=
µ (4)
This weight corresponds to the value of V in that equalizes the two floating­gate volt­
ages (and maximizes I mid ). Part (b) of Fig. 1 shows the bump circuit's I mid output for
three weight values, as a function of the differential input. We see that different
stored values change the location of the peak, but do not change the shape of the
bump. Because floating gate charge is nonvolatile, the weight is also nonvolatile.
The differential encoding of the input makes the bump circuit's adaptation symmet­
ric with respect to (V in -- µ). Without loss of generality, we can represent V in as:
in s2 s1 in
( )
V V V V µ
= - + - (5)
If we apply V in /2 and --V in /2 to the two input terminals, we arrive at the following
two floating­gate voltages:
fg1 s2 s1 in
( ) / 2
V V V V µ
= + + - (6)
fg2 s2 s1 in
( ) / 2
V V V V µ
= + - + (7)
By reversing the sign of (V in -- µ), we obtain the same floating­gate voltages on the
opposite terminals. Because the floating gate voltages are independent of the sign of
(V in -- µ), the bump circuit's learning rule is symmetric with respect to (V in -- µ).
3 . 2 Adap t a t i on
We now explore the bump circuit's adaptation dynamics. We define DV fg =V fg1 --V fg2 .
From Eqs. 4--7, we can see that V in --µ=DV fg . Consequently, the learning rate, dµ/dt,
is equivalent to --dDV fg /dt. In our subsequent derivations, we consider only positive
DV fg , because adaptation is symmetric (albeit with a change of sign). We show com­
plete derivations of the equations in this section in [9].
Tunneling causes adaptation by decreasing the difference between the floating­gate
voltages V fg1 and V fg2 . Electron tunneling increases the voltage of both floating
gates, but, because tunneling increases exponentially with smaller floating­gate
voltages (see Eq.1), tunneling decreases the difference. Assuming that M1's floating
gate voltage is lower than M2's, the change in DV fg due to electron tunneling is:
f tun1 tun2 fg
/ ( ) /
g
d V dt I I C
D = - - (8)
We substitute Eq.1 into Eq.8 and solve for the tunneling learning rule:
tun 0
( ) / V
fg t0 fg
/ sinh(( ) / 2V )
V V
d V dt I e V f
D -D
D = - D - (9)
where I t0 =I tun0 /C fg , V c is a model constant, DV 0 = (DV fg1 + DV fg2 )/2, and f models the
tunneling mismatch between synapse transistors. This rule depends on three factors:

a controllable learning rate, DV tun ; the difference between V in and µ, DV fg ; and the
average floating gate voltage, DV 0 .
The circuit also uses IHEI to decrease DV fg . We bias the bump circuit so that only
transistors M1 and M2 exhibit IHEI. According to Eq.2, IHEI depends linearly on a
transistor's source current, but exponentially on its source­to­drain voltage. Conse­
quently, we decrease DV fg by controlling the drain voltages at M1 and M2. Coupled
current mirrors (M6--M7 and M8--M9) at the drains of M1 and M2, simultaneously
raise the drain voltage of the transistor that is sourcing a larger current, and lower
the drain voltage of the transistor that is sourcing a smaller current. The transistor
with the smaller source current will experience a larger V sd , and thus exponentially
more IHEI, causing its source current to rapidly increase. Diodes (M10 and M11)
further increase the drain voltage of the transistor with the larger current, further
reducing its IHEI. The net effect is that IHEI acts to equalize the currents, and, like­
wise, the floating gate voltages. Recently Hasler proposed a similar method for
controlling IHEI in a floating gate differential pair [4].
Assuming I 1 >I 2 , the change in DV fg due to IHEI is:
fg inj2 inj1 fg
/ ( ) /
d V dt I I C
D = - - (10)
We expand the learning rule by substituting Eq.2 into Eq.10. To compute values for
the drain voltages of M 1 and M 2 , we assume that all of I 1 flows through M11 and all
of I 2 flows through M7. The IHEI learning rule is given below:
inj inj
0
j0 1 fg 2 fg
/ ( ( ) ( ))
V
V V
fg
d V dt I e e V e V
D = - F D - F D (11)
where I j0 =I inj0 /C fg , t= --2/kV g , h= --1/V g , and z=k/V g . F 1 and F 2 are given by:
##
1 2U / #
1 fg b mid fg t
( ) 2 cosh( # !V
(( ) / )) V
V I I V e
- - D
F D = D
- (12)
fg fg t
# # # # #
2 fg b mid fg
( ) ( 2 cosh( # !V #  # #
( ) / )) V V
t
V I I V e e
- - -
F D = D -
-   (13) 
where  s   =(1 -- U t /V g )k/2U t ,  and  w  =k/2U t -- k/2V g -- 1/V g .  Like  tunneling,  the  IHEI 
rule  depends  on  three  factors:  a  controllable  learning  rate,  V inj ;  the  difference  be­
tween V in   and µ, DV fg ;  and DV 0 .  Part  (a)  of  Fig.  2  shows measurements of dDV fg /dt 
versus DV fg  due to tunneling and IHEI, along with fits to Eqs.9 and 11 respectively. 
(V/ms)
due
to
injection
/
t
V
fg
d
D
-d
(V)
fg
V
D
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
10 ­8
10 ­7
10 ­6
10 ­5
injection data
tunneling data
fit
D
10 ­11
10 ­10
10 ­9
10 ­8
10 ­7
from
tunneling
/
t
V
fg
d
D
-d
(V)
fg
V
D
(V/ms)
/
t
V
fg
d
D
­d
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
10 ­9
10 ­8
10 ­7
data
fit
(a) (b)
Figure 2. (a) Measured adaptation rates, due to tunneling and IHEI, along with fits
from Eqs.9 and 11. (b) Composite adaptation rate, along with a fit from (12). We
slowed the IHEI adaptation rate (by using a higher V inj ), compared with the data
from part (a), to cause better matching between tunneling and IHEI.

IHEI and tunneling facilitate adaptation by adding and removing charge from the
floating gates, respectively. Isolated, any of these mechanisms will eventually drive
the bump circuit out of its operating range. In order to obtain useful adaptation, we
need to activate both mechanisms at the same time. There is an added benefit to
combining tunneling and IHEI: Part (a) Fig 2 shows that tunneling acts more
strongly for smaller values of DV fg , while IHEI shows the opposite behavior. The
mechanisms complement each other, providing adaptation over more than a 1V range
in DV fg . We combine Eq.9 and Eq.11 to derive the bump learning rule:
inj
tun 0 ###
0
( )/V #
#
fg t0 fg
/ sinh(( ) / 2V ) ( ( ) ( ))
V V V
d V dt I e V I e e V e V
V
f
D -D D
- D = D - + F D - F D (14)
Part (b) of Fig. 2 illustrates the composite weight­update dynamics. When DV fg is
small, adaptation is primarily driven by IHEI, while tunneling dominates for larger
values of DV fg .
The bump learning rule is unlike any learning rule that we have found in the litera­
ture. Nevertheless, it exhibits several desirable properties. First, it naturally moves
the bump circuit's weight towards the present input. Second, the weight update is
symmetric with respect to the difference between the stored value and the present
input. Third, we can vary the weight­update rate over many orders of magnitude by
adjusting V tun and V inj . Finally, because the bump circuit uses synapse transistors to
perform adaptation, the circuit can adapt during normal operation.
4 Compet i t i ve l earn i ng w i th bump c i rcu i ts
We summarize the results of simulations of the bump learning rule and also results
from a competitive learning circuit fabricated in the TSMC 0.35 µm process below.
For further details consult [9]. We first compared the performance of a software
neural network on a standard clustering task, using the bump learning rule (fitted to
data from Fig. 2), and a basic competitive learning rule (learning rate r=0.01):
)
(
/ µ
r
µ r
r
r -
×
= in
V
dt
d (15)
We trained both networks on data drawn from a mixture of 32 Gaussians, in a 32­
dimensional space. The Gaussian means were drawn from the interval [0,1] and the
covariance matrix was the diagonal matrix 0.1*I. On an input presentation, the net­
work updated the weight vector of the closest neuron using either the bump learning
rule, or Eq.15. We measured the performance of the two learning rules by evaluat­
ing the coding error of each trained network, on a test set drawn from the same dis­
tribution as the training data. The coding error is the sum of the squared distances
between each test point and its closest neuron. Part (a) of Fig. 3 shows that the
bump circuit's rule performs favorably with the hard competitive learning rule.
Our VLSI circuit (Part (b) of Fig. 3) comprised two neurons with a one­dimensional
input (a neuron was a single bump circuit), and a feedback network to control adap­
tation. The feedback network comprised a winner­take­all (WTA) [10] that detected
which bump was closest to the present input, and additional circuitry [9] that gener­
ated V tun and V inj from the WTA output. We tested this circuit on a clustering task,
to learn the centers of a mixture of two Gaussians. In part (c) of Fig. 3, we compare
the performance of our circuit with a simulated neural network using Eq.15. The
VLSI circuit performed comparably with the neural network, demonstrating that our
bump circuit, in conjunction with simple feedback mechanisms, can implement
competitive learning in VLSI. We can generalize the circuitry to multiple dimen­
sions (multiple bump circuits per neuron) and multiple neurons; each neuron only
requires one V tun and V inj signal.

Acknow l edgemen t s
This work was supported by the NSF under grants BES 9720353 and ECS 9733425,
and by a Packard Foundation Fellowship.
Re f erence s
[1] M.A. Arbib (ed.), The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks, Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press, 1995.
[2] H.C. Card, D.K. McNeill, and C.R. Schneider, ``Analog VLSI circuits for competitive learning
networks'', in Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, 15, pp. 291­314, 1998.
[3] C. Diorio, ``A p­channel MOS synapse transistor with self­convergent memory writes'', IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 47, no. 2, pp 464­472, 2000.
[4] P. Hasler, ‘‘Continuous­Time Feedback in Floating­Gate MOS Circuits,'' to appear in IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems II, Feb. 2001
[5] T. Allen et. al, ``Electrically adaptable neural network with post­processing circuitry,'' U.S.
Patent No. 5,331,215, issued July 19, 1994.
[6] M. Lenzlinger and E.H. Snow, ``Fowler--Nordheim tunneling into thermally grown Si0 2 '',
Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 40(1), pp. 278­283, 1969.
[7] E. Takeda, C. Yang, and A. Miura­Hamada, Hot Carrier Effects in MOS Devices, San Diego,
CA: Academic Press, 1995.
[8] T. Delbruck, ``Bump circuits for computing similarity and dissimilarity of analog voltages'',
CNS Memo 26, California Institute of Technology, 1993.
[9] D. Hsu, M. Figueroa, and C. Diorio, ``A silicon primitive for competitive learning,'' UW CSE
Technical Report no. 2000­07­01, 2000.
[10] J. Lazzaro, S. Ryckebusch, M.A. Mahowald, and C.A. Mead, ``Winner­take­all networks of
O(n) complexity'', in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufman, vol. 1, pp 703­711, 1989.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
target values
circuit output
neural network output
value
(V)
number of training examples
µ 1
Winner­take­all
input X
bump
circuits µ 2
||µ ­ X|| ||µ 2 ­ X||
feedback
circuitry
1/0 1/0
(V tun2 ,V inj2 )
(V tun1 ,V inj1 )
(b)
(c)
number of training examples
test
set
error
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
1
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
3 x 10 4
Hard competitive learning rule
bump learning rule
(a)
Figure 3. (a) Comparison of a neural
network using the bump learning rule
versus a standard competitive learning
rule. We drew the training data from a
mixture of thirty­two Gaussians, and
averaged the results over ten trials. (b) A
competitive learning circuit. (c) Per­
formance of a competitive learning cir­
cuit versus a neural network for learning
a mixture of two Gaussians.

