Color Opponency Constitutes A Sparse
Representation For the Chromatic
Structure of Natural Scenes
Te­Won Lee \Lambda , Thomas Wachtler and Terrence Sejnowski
Institute for Neural Computation, University of California, San Diego &
Computational Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute
10010 N. Torrey Pines Road
La Jolla, California 92037, USA
ftewon,thomas,terryg@salk.edu
Abstract
The human visual system encodes the chromatic signals conveyed
by the three types of retinal cone photoreceptors in an opponent
fashion. This color opponency has been shown to constitute an
efficient encoding by spectral decorrelation of the receptor signals.
We analyze the spatial and chromatic structure of natural scenes by
decomposing the spectral images into a set of linear basis functions
such that they constitute a representation with minimal redun­
dancy. Independent component analysis finds the basis functions
that transforms the spatiochromatic data such that the outputs
(activations) are statistically as independent as possible, i.e. least
redundant. The resulting basis functions show strong opponency
along an achromatic direction (luminance edges), along a blue­
yellow direction, and along a red­blue direction. Furthermore, the
resulting activations have very sparse distributions, suggesting that
the use of color opponency in the human visual system achieves a
highly efficient representation of colors. Our findings suggest that
color opponency is a result of the properties of natural spectra and
not solely a consequence of the overlapping cone spectral sensitiv­
ities.
1 Statistical structure of natural scenes
Efficient encoding of visual sensory information is an important task for informa­
tion processing systems and its study may provide insights into coding principles
of biological visual systems. An important goal of sensory information processing
\Lambda Electronic version available at www.cnl.salk.edu/¸tewon.

is to transform the input signals such that the redundancy between the inputs is
reduced. In natural scenes, the image intensity is highly predictable from neighbor­
ing measurements and an efficient representation preserves the information while
the neuronal output is minimized. Recently, several methods have been proposed
for finding efficient codes for achromatic images of natural scenes [1, 2, 3, 4]. While
luminance dominates the structure of the visual world, color vision provides impor­
tant additional information about our environment. Therefore, we are interested
in efficient, i.e. redundancy reducing representations for the chromatic structure of
natural scenes.
2 Learning efficient representation for chromatic image
Our goal was to find efficient representations of the chromatic sensory information
such that its spatial and chromatic redundancy is reduced significantly. The method
we used for finding statistically efficient representations is independent component
analysis (ICA). ICA is a way of finding a linear non­orthogonal co­ordinate system
in multivariate data that minimizes mutual information among the axial projections
of the data. The directions of the axes of this co­ordinate system (basis functions)
are determined by both second and higher­order statistics of the original data, com­
pared to Principal Component Analysis (PCA) which is used solely in second order
statistics and has orthogonal basis functions. The goal of ICA is to perform a
linear transform which makes the resulting source outputs as statistically indepen­
dent from each other as possible [5]. ICA assumes an unknown source vector s
with mutually independent components s i . A small patch of the observed image is
stretched into a vector x that can be represented as a linear combination of sources
components s i such that
x = As; (1)
where A is a scalar square matrix and the columns of A are the basis functions.
Since A and s are unknown the goal of ICA is to adapt the basis functions by esti­
mating s so that the individual components s i are statistically independent and this
adaptation process minimizes the mutual information between the components s i .
A learning algorithm can be derived using the information maximization principle
[5] or the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) method which can be shown to be
equivalent in this case. In our experiments, we used the infomax learning rule with
natural gradient extension and the learning algorithm for the basis functions is
\DeltaA / A \Theta
I \Gamma '(s)s T \Lambda
: (2)
where I is the identity matrix, '(s) = \Gamma @p(s)=@s
p(s) and s T denotes the matrix trans­
pose of s. \DeltaA is the change of the basis functions that is added to A. The change
in \DeltaA will converge to zero once the adaptation process is complete. Note that
'(s) requires a density model for p(s i ). We used a parametric exponential power
density p(s i ) / exp(\Gammajs i j q i ) and simultaneously updated its shape by inferring the
value q i to match the distribution of the estimated sources [6]. This is accomplished
by finding the maximum posteriori value of q i given the observed data. The ICA
algorithm can thus characterize a wide class of statistical distributions including
uniform, Gaussian, Laplacian, and other so­called sub­ and super­Gaussian densi­
ties. In other words, our experiments do not constrain the coefficients to have a

...
= s 1
. +s 2
. +s 3 .
[nm]
l
400 500 600 700
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
a)
b)
Figure 1: Linear decomposition of an observed spectral image patch into its basis
functions.
sparse distribution, unlike some previous methods [1, 2]. The algorithm converged
to a solution of maximal independence and the distributions of the coefficients were
approximated by exponential power densities.
We investigated samples of spectral images of natural scenes as illustrated in Fig­
ure 1. We analyzed a set of hyperspectral images [7] with a size of 256\Theta256 pixels.
Each pixel is represented by radiance values for 31 wavebands of 10 nm width,
sampled in 10 nm steps between 400 and 700 nm. The pixel size corresponds to
0.056\Theta0.056 deg of visual angle. The images were recorded around Bristol, either
outdoors, or inside the glass houses of Bristol Botanical Gardens. We chose eight
of these images which had been obtained outdoors under apparently different illu­
mination conditions. The vector of 31 spectral radiance values of each pixel was
converted to a vector of 3 cone excitation values whose components were the inner
products of the radiance vector with the vectors of L­, M­, and S­cone sensitivity
values [8], respectively. From the entire image data set, 7\Theta7 pixel image patches
were chosen randomly, yielding 7\Theta7\Theta3 = 147 dimensional vectors. The learning
process was done in 500 steps, each using a set of spectra of 40000 image patches,
5000 chosen randomly from each of the eight images. A set of basis functions for
7x7 pixel patches was obtained, with each pixel containing the logarithms of the
excitations of the three human cone photoreceptors that represented the receptor
signals in the human retina [8, 9]. To visualize the learned basis functions, we

used the method by Ruderman et al.[9] and plotted for each basis function a 7\Theta7
pixel matrix, with the color of each pixel indicating the combination of L, M, and
S cone responses as follows. The values for each patch were normalized to values
between 0 and 255, with 0 cone excitation corresponding to a value of 128. Thus,
the R, G, and B components of each pixel represent the relative excitations of L,
M, and S cones, respectively. To further illustrate the chromatic properties of the
basis functions, we convert the L, M, S vector of each pixel to its projection onto
the isoluminant plane of a cone­opponent color space similar to the color spaces of
MacLeod and Boynton[10] and Derrington et al[11]. In our plots, the horizontal
axis corresponds to the response of an L cone versus M cone opponent mechanism,
the vertical axis corresponds to S cone modulation. For each pixel of the basis
functions, a point is plotted at its corresponding location in that color space. The
color of the points are the same as used for the pixels in the top part of the fig­
ure. Thus, although only the projection onto the isoluminant plane is shown, the
third dimension (i.e., luminance) can be inferred by the brightness of the points.
Figure 2a shows the learned ICA basis functions in a pseudo color representation.
Figure 2b shows the color space coordinates of the chromaticities of the pixels in
each basis function. The PCA basis functions and their corresponding color space
coordinates are shown in Figure 2c and 2d respectively. Both representations are
in order of decreasing L 2 ­norm. The PCA results show a global spatial represen­
tation and their opponent basis functions lie mostly along the coordinate axes of
the cone­opponent color space. In addition, there are functions that imply mixtures
of non­opponent colors. In contrast to PCA basis functions, the ICA basis func­
tions are localized and oriented. When ordered by decreasing L 2 ­norm, achromatic
basis functions tend to appear before chromatic basis functions. This reflects the
fact that in the natural environment, luminance variations are generally larger than
chromatic variations [7]. The achromatic basis functions are localized and oriented,
similar to those found in the analysis of grayscale natural images [1, 2]. Most of the
chromatic basis functions, particularly those with strong contributions, are color
opponent, i.e., the chromaticities of their pixels lie roughly along a line through the
origin of our color space. Most chromatic basis functions with relatively high con­
tributions are modulated between light blue and dark yellow, in the plane defined
by luminance and S­cone modulation. Those with lower L 2 ­norm are highly local­
ized, but still are mostly oriented. There are other chromatic basis functions with
tilted orientations, corresponding to blue versus orange colors. The chromaticities
of these basis functions occupy mainly the second and fourth quadrant. The basis
functions with lowest contributions are less strictly aligned in color space, but still
tend to be color opponent, mostly along a bluish­green/orange direction. There are
no basis functions with chromaticities along the horizontal axis, corresponding to
pure L versus M cone opponency, like PCA basis functions in Figure 2d [9]. The
tilted orientations of the opponency axes most likely reflects the distribution of the
chromaticities in our images. In natural images, L­M and S coordinates in our
color space are negatively correlated [12]. ICA finds the directions that correspond
to maximally decorrelated signals, i.e. extracts statistical structure of the inputs.
PCA did not yield basis functions in these directions, probably because it is limited
by the orthogonality constraint. While it is known that chromatic properties of
neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of primates correspond to varia­
tions along the axes of cone­opponency (`cardinal axes') [11], cortical neurons show
sensitivities for intermediate directions [13]. Since the results of PCA and ICA,

respectively, match these differences qualitatively, we suspect that opponent coding
along the `cardinal directions' of cone opponency is used by the visual system to
transmit reliably visual information to the cortex, where the information is recoded
in order to better reflect the statistical structure of the environment [14].
3 Discussion
This result shows that the independence criterion alone is sufficient to learn efficient
image codes. Although no sparseness constraint was used, the obtained coefficients
are extremely sparse, i.e. the data x are encoded in the sources s in such a way
that the coefficients of s are mostly around zero; there is only a small percentage
of informative values (non­zero coefficients). From an information coding perspec­
tive this assumes that we can encode and decode the chromatic image patches with
only a small percentage of the basis functions. In contrast, Gaussian densities are
not sparsely distributed and a large portion of the basis functions is required to
represent the chromatic images. The normalized kurtosis value is one measure of
sparseness and the average kurtosis value was 19.7 for ICA, and 6.6 for PCA. In­
terestingly the basis functions in Figure2a produced only sparse coefficients except
for basis function 7 (green basis function) that resulted in a nearly uniform dis­
tribution, suggesting that this basis function is active almost all the time. The
reason may be that a green color component is present in almost all image patches
of the natural scenes. We repeated the experiment with different ICA methods and
obtained similar results. The basis functions obtained with the exponential power
distributions or the simple Laplacian prior were statistically most efficient. In this
sense, the basis functions that produce sparse distributions are statistically efficient
codes. To quantitatively measure the encoding difference we compared the coding
efficiency between ICA and PCA using Shannon's theorem to obtain a lower bound
on the number of bits required to encode a spatiochromatic pattern [4]. The aver­
age number of bits required to encode 40000 patches randomly selected from the 8
images in Figure 1 with a fixed noise coding precision of oe x = 0:059 was 1.73 bits
for ICA and 4.46 bits for PCA. Note that the encoding difference for achromatic
image patches using ICA and PCA is about 20% in favor of ICA [4]. The encod­
ing difference in the chromatic case is significantly higher (? 100%) and suggests
that there is a large amount of chromatic redundancy in the natural scenes. To
verify our findings, we computed the average pairwise mutual information I in the
original data (I x = 0:1522), the PCA representation (I PCA = 0:0123) and the ICA
representation (I ICA = 0:0093). ICA was able to further reduce the redundancy
between its components, and its basis functions therefore represent more efficient
codes.
In general, the ICA results support the argument that basis functions for efficient
coding of chromatic natural images are non­orthogonal. In order to determine
whether the color opponency is merely a result of correlation in the receptor sig­
nals due to the strong overlap of the photoreceptor sensitivities [15], we repeated
the analysis, this time assuming hypothetical receptor sensitivities which do not
overlap, but sample roughly in the same regions as the L­, M­, and S­ cones. We
used rectangular sensitivities with absorptions between 420 and 480 nm (''S''), 490
and 550 nm (''M''), and 560 and 620 nm (''L''), respectively. The resulting basis
functions were as strongly color opponent as for the case of overlapping cone sensi­
tivities. This suggests that the correlations of radiance values in natural spectra are

L­M
S
L­M
S
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 2: (a) 147 total ICA spatiochromatic structure of basis functions (7 by 7
pixels and 3 colors) are shown in order of decreasing L 2 ­norm, from top to bottom
and left to right. The R, G, and B values of the color of each pixel correspond to
the relative excitation of L­, M­, and S­cones, respectively. (b) Chromaticities of
the ICA basis functions, plotted in cone­opponent color space coordinates. Each
dot represents the coordinate of a pixel of the respective basis function, projected
onto the isoluminant plane. Luminance can be inferred from the brightness of the
dot. Horizontal axes: L­ versus M­cone variation. Vertical axes: S­cone varia­
tion. (c) 147 PCA spatiochromatic basis functions and (d) Corresponding PCA
chromaticities.

sufficiently high to require a color opponent code in order to represent the chromatic
structure efficiently. In summary, our findings strongly suggest color opponency is
not a mere consequence of the overlapping cone spectral sensitivities but moreover
an attempt to represent the intrinsic spatiochromatic structure of natural scenes in
a statistically efficient manner.
References
[1] B. Olshausen and D. Field. Emergence of simple­cell receptive field properties by
learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature, 381:607--609, 1996.
[2] A. J. Bell and T. J. Sejnowski. The 'independent components' of natural scenes are
edge filters. Vision Research, 37(23):3327--3338, 1997.
[3] J. H. van Hateren and A. van der Schaaf. Independent component filters of natural
images compared with simple cells in primary visual cortex. Proc.R.Soc.Lond. B,
265:359--366, 1998.
[4] M.S. Lewicki and B. Olshausen. A probablistic framwork for the adaptation and
comparison of image codes. J. Opt.Soc., A: Optics, Image Science and Vision, in
press, 1999.
[5] A. J. Bell and T. J. Sejnowski. An Information­Maximization Approach to Blind
Separation and Blind Deconvolution. Neural Computation, 7:1129--1159, 1995.
[6] M.S. Lewicki. A flexible prior for independent component analysis. Neural Compu­
tation, submitted, 2000.
[7] C. A. P'arraga, G. Brelstaff, and T. Troscianko. Color and luminance information
in natural scenes. Journal of the Optical Society of America A, 15:563--569, 1998.
(http://www.crs4.it/¸gjb/ftpJOSA.html).
[8] A. Stockman, D. I. A. MacLeod, and N. E. Johnson. Spectral sensitivities of the
human cones. Journal of the Optical Society of America A, 10:2491--2521, 1993.
(http://www­cvrl.ucsd.edu).
[9] D. L. Ruderman, T. W. Cronin, and C.­C. Chiao. Statistics of cone responses to
natural images: Implications for visual coding. Journal of the Optical Society of
America A, 15:2036--2045, 1998.
[10] D. I. A. MacLeod and R. M. Boynton. Chromaticity diagram showing cone excitation
by stimuli of equal luminance. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 69:1183--
1186, 1979.
[11] A. M. Derrington, J. Krauskopf, and P. Lennie. Chromatic mechanisms in lateral
geniculate nucleus of macaque. Journal of Physiology, 357:241--265, 1984.
[12] D. I. A. MacLeod and T. von der Twer. The pleistochrome: Optimal opponent codes
for natural colors. Preprint, 1998.
[13] P. Lennie, J. Krauskopf, and G. Sclar. Chromatic mechanisms in striate cortex of
macaque. Journal of Neuroscience, 10:649--669, 1990.
[14] D. J. Field. What is the goal of sensory coding? Neural Computation, 6:559--601,
1994.
[15] G. Buchsbaum and A. Gottschalk. Trichromacy, opponent colours coding and opti­
mum colour information transmission in the retina. Proceedings of the Royal Society
London B, 220:89--113, 1983.

