APRICODD: Approximate Policy Construction
using Decision Diagrams
Robert St­Aubin
Dept. of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
staubin@cs.ubc.ca
Jesse Hoey
Dept. of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
jhoey@cs.ubc.ca
Craig Boutilier
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3H5
cebly@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
We propose a method of approximate dynamic programming for Markov
decision processes (MDPs) using algebraic decision diagrams (ADDs).
We produce near­optimal value functions and policies with much lower
time and space requirements than exact dynamic programming. Our
method reduces the sizes of the intermediate value functions generated
during value iteration by replacing the values at the terminals of the ADD
with ranges of values. Our method is demonstrated on a class of large
MDPs (with up to 34 billion states), and we compare the results with the
optimal value functions.
1 Introduction
The last decade has seen much interest in structured approaches to solving planning prob­
lems under uncertainty formulated as Markov decision processes (MDPs). Structured algo­
rithms allow problems to be solved without explicit state­space enumeration by aggregating
states of identical value. Structured approaches using decision trees have been applied to
classical dynamic programming (DP) algorithms such as value iteration and policy itera­
tion [7, 3]. Recently, Hoey et.al. [8] have shown that significant computational advantages
can be obtained by using an Algebraic Decision Diagram (ADD) representation [1, 4, 5].
Notwithstanding such advances, large MDPs must often be solved approximately. This can
be accomplished by reducing the ``level of detail'' in the representation and aggregating
states with similar (rather than identical) value. Approximations of this kind have been
examined in the context of tree structured approaches [2]; this paper extends this research
by applying them to ADDs. Specifically, the terminal of an ADD will be labeled with the
range of values taken by the corresponding set of states. As we will see, ADDs have a
number of advantages over trees.
We develop two approximation methods for ADD­structured value functions, and apply
them to the value diagrams generated during dynamic programming. The result is a near­
optimal value function and policy. We examine the tradeoff between computation time and
decision quality, and consider several variable reordering strategies that facilitate approxi­
mate aggregation.

2 Solving MDPs using Algebraic Decision Diagrams
We assume a fully­observable MDP [10] with finite sets of states S and actions A, tran­
sition function Pr(s; a; t), reward function R, and a discounted infinite­horizon optimality
criterion with discount factor . Value iteration can be used to compute an optimal station­
ary policy  : S ! A by constructing a series of n­stage­to­go value functions, where:
V n+1 (s) = R(s) + max
a2A
(

X
t2S
P r(s; a; t)  V n (t)
)
(1)
The sequence of value functions V n produced by value iteration converges linearly to the
optimal value function V  . For some finite n, the actions that maximize Equation 1 form
an optimal policy, and V n approximates its value.
ADDs [1, 4, 5] are a compact, efficiently manipulable data structure for representing real­
valued functions over boolean variables B n ! R. They generalize a tree­structured rep­
resentation by allowing nodes to have multiple parents, leading to the recombination of
isomorphic subgraphs and hence to a possible reduction in the representation size. A more
precise definition of the semantics of ADDs can be found in [9].
Recently, we applied ADDs to the solution of large MDPs [8], yielding significant
space/time savings over related tree­structured approaches. We assume the state of an
MDP is characterized by a set of variables X = fX 1 ;    ; Xn g. Values of variable X i will
be denoted in lowercase (e.g., x i ). We assume each X i is boolean. 1 Actions are described
using dynamic Bayesian networks (DBNs) [6, 3] with ADDs representing their conditional
probability tables. Specifically, a DBN for action a requires two sets of variables, one set
X = fX 1 ;    ; Xn g referring to the state of the system before action a has been executed,
and X 0 = fX 0
1 ;    ; X 0
n g denoting the state after a has been executed. Directed arcs from
variables in X to variables in X 0 indicate direct causal influence. The conditional proba­
bility table (CPT) for each post­action variable X 0
i defines a conditional distribution P a
X 0
i
over X 0
i ---i.e., a's effect on X i ---for each instantiation of its parents. This can be viewed
as a function P a
X 0
i
(X 1 : : : Xn ), but where the function value (distribution) depends only on
those X j that are parents of X 0
i . We represent this function using an ADD. Reward func­
tions can also be represented using ADDs. Figure 1(a) shows a simple example of a single
action represented as a DBN as well as a reward function.
We use the method of Hoey et. al [8] to perform value iteration using ADDs. We refer to
that paper for full details on the algorithm, and present only a brief outline here. The ADD
representation of the CPTs for each action, P a
X 0
i
(X), are referred to as action diagrams,
as shown in Figure 1(b), where X represents the set of pre­action variables, fX 1 ; : : : Xn g.
These action diagrams can be combined into a complete action diagram (Figure 1(c)):
P a (X 0 ; X) =
n
Y
i=1
X 0
i  P a
X 0
i
(X) +X 0
i  (1 P a
X 0
i
(X)): (2)
The complete action diagram represents all the effects of pre­action variables on post­
action variables for a given action. The immediate reward function R(X 0 ) is also repre­
sented as an ADD, as are the n­stage­to­go value functions V n (X). Given the complete
action diagrams for each action, and the immediate reward function, value iteration can be
performed by setting V 0 = R, and applying Eq. 1,
V n+1 (X) = R(X) + max
a2A
(

X
X 0
P a (X 0 ; X)  V n (X 0 )
)
; (3)
1 An extension to multi­valued variables would be straightforward.

REWARD
X
T
F 0.2
Representation
ADD
Representation
Matrix
Y
Y
Y'
X'
X
X
Y Y'
X'
T
T
T
F
F
F
0.8 Y
X
X
T
F
reward
0
10
X
0
10
0.8 0.2
Complete
Action Diagram
0.2
0.8
0.2
0.2
0.8
(b) (c)
(a)
X
X X
X
Y
Y
Y Y
0.16 0.64 0.04
Y' Y'
X'
true false
KEY
Y
0.2
T
F
Figure 1: ADD representation of an MDP: (a) action network for a single action (top)
and the immediate reward network (bottom) (b) Matrix and ADD representation of CPTs
(action diagrams) (c) Complete action diagram.
X
1.1 5.4 5.6 9.3 5.2 9.7 5.1 9.8
Y Y
Z
Z
Z
Z
X X
Y
Z
1.1
Z
[9.3,9.8]
[5.1,5.6]
(c) 0.5
Y
Z
Z
1.1 5.4 9.3
Z
5.6 [5.1,5.2]
(b) 0.1
(a)
[9.7,9.8]
Figure 2: Approximation of original value diagram (a) with errors of 0.1 (b) and 0.5 (c).
followed by swapping all unprimed variables with primed ones. All operations in Equa­
tion 3 are well defined in terms of ADDs [8, 12]. The value iteration loop is continued until
some stopping criterion is met. Various optimizations are applied to make this calculation
as efficient as possible in both space and time.
3 Approximating Value Functions
While structured solution techniques offer many advantages, the exact solution of MDPs
in this way can only work if there are ``few'' distinct values in a value function. Even if a
DBN representation shows little dependence among variables from one stage to another,
the influence of variables tends to ``bleed'' through a DBN over time, and many variables
become relevant to predicting value. Thus, even using structured methods, we must often
relax the optimality constraint and generate only approximate value functions, from which
near­optimal policies will hopefully arise. It is generally the case that many of the values
distinguished by DP are similar. Replacing such values with a single approximate values
leads to size reduction, while not significantly affecting the precision of the value diagrams.
3.1 Decision Diagrams and Approximation
Consider the value diagram shown in Figure 2(a), which has eight distinct values as shown.
The value of each state s is represented as a pair [l; u], where the lower, l, and upper, u,
bounds on the values are both represented. The span of a state, s, is given by span(s)=u l.
Point values are represented by setting u=l, and have zero span. Now suppose that the

diagram in Figure 2(a) exceeds resource limits, and a reduction in size is necessary to
continue the value iteration process. If we choose to no longer distinguish values which
are within 0.1 or 0.5 of each other, the diagrams in Figure 2(b) or (c) result, respec­
tively. The states which had proximal values have been merged, where merging a set of
states s 1 ; s 2 ; : : : ; s n with values [l 1 ; u 1 ]; : : : ; [l n ; un ], results in an aggregate state, t, with
a ranged value [min(l 1 ; : : : ; l n ); max(u 1 ; : : : ; un )]. The midpoint of the range estimates
the true value of the states with minimal error, namely, span(t)=2 . The span of V is the
maximum of all spans in the value diagram, and therefore the maximum error in V is sim­
ply span(V )=2 [2]. The combined span of a set of states is the span of the pair that would
result from merging them all. The extent of a value diagram V is the combined span of the
portion of the state space which it represents. The span of the diagram in Figure 2(c) is 0.5,
but its extent is 8.7.
ADD­structured value functions can be leveraged by approximation techniques because
approximations can always be performed directly without pre­processing techniques such
as variable reordering. Of course, variable reordering can still play an important computa­
tional role in ADD­structured methods, but are not needed for discovering approximations.
3.2 Value Iteration with Approximate Value Functions
Approximate value iteration simply means applying an approximation technique to the n­
stage to go value function generated at each iteration of Eq. 3. Available resources might
dictate that ADDs be kept below some fixed size. In contrast, decision quality might require
errors below some fixed value, referred to as the pruning strength, Æ. The remainder of this
paper will focus on the latter, although we have examined the former as well [9].
Thus, the objective of a single approximation step is a reduction in the size of a ranged
value ADD by replacing all leaves which have combined spans less than the specified
error bound by a single leaf. Given a leaf [l; u] in V , the set of all leaves [l i ; u i ] such
that the combined span of [l i ; u i ] with [l; u] is less than the specified error are merged.
Repeating this process until no more merges are possible gives the desired result. We have
also examined a quicker, but less exact, method for approximation, which exploits the fact
that simply reducing the precision of the values at the leaves of an ADD merges the similar
values. We defer explanations to the longer version of this paper [9].
The sequence of ranged value functions, ~
V n , converges after n 0 iterations to an approximate
(non­ranged) value function, ~
V , by taking the mid­points of each ranged terminal node in
~
V n 0
. The pruning strength, Æ, then gives the percentage difference between ~
V and the
optimal n 0 ­stage­to­go value function V n 0
. The value function ~
V induces a policy, ~ , the
value of which is V ~  . In general, however, V ~  6= ~
V [11] 2 .
3.3 Variable Reordering
As previously mentioned, variable reordering can have a significant effect on the size of an
ADD, but finding the variable ordering which gives rise to the smallest ADD for a boolean
function is co­NP­complete [4]. We examine three reordering methods. The first two are
standard for reordering variables in BDDs: Rudell's sifting algorithm and random reorder­
ing [12]. The last reordering method we consider arises in the decision tree induction
literature, and is related to the information gain criterion. Given a value diagram V with
extent Æ, each variable x is considered in turn. The value diagram is restricted first with
x = true, and the extent Æ t and the number of leaves n t are calculated for the restricted
ADD. Similar values Æ f and n f are found for the x = false restriction. If we collapsed the
entire ADD into a single node, assuming a uniform distribution over values in the resulting
2 In fact, the equality arises if and only if ~
V = V
 , where V
 is the optimal value function.

range gives us the entropy for the entire ADD:
E =
Z
p(v)log(p(v))dv = log(Æ); (4)
and represents our degree of uncertainty about the values in the diagram. Splitting the
values with the variable x results in two new value diagrams, for each of which the entropy
is calculated. The gain in information (decrease in entropy) values are used to rank the
variables, and the resulting order is applied to the diagram. This method will be referred to
as the minimum span method.
4 Results
The procedures described above were implemented using a modified version of the CUDD
package [12] , a library of C routines which provides support for manipulation of ADDs.
Experimental results from this section were all obtained using one processor on a dual­
processor Pentium II PC running at 400Mhz with 0.5Gb of RAM. Our approximation meth­
ods were tested on various adaptations of a process planning problem taken from [7, 8]. 3
4.1 Approximation
All experiments in this section were performed on problem domains where the variable
ordering was the one selected implicitly by the constructors of the domains. 4
Value Æ time iter nodes leaves jV  V ~  j
Function (%) (s) (int) (%)
Optimal 0 270.91 44 22170 527 0.0
1 562.35 44 17108 117 0.13
2 547.00 44 15960 77 0.14
3 112.7 15 15230 58 5.45
Approximate 4 68.53 12 14510 48 1.20
5 38.06 10 11208 38 2.48
10 6.24 6 3739 15 11.33
15 0.70 4 580 9 14.11
20 0.57 4 299 6 16.66
30 0.05 2 50 3 25.98
40 0.07 2 10 2 30.28
50 0.04 1 0 1 31.25
Table 1: Comparing optimal with approximate value iteration on a domain with 28 boolean
variables.
In Table 1 we compare optimal value iteration using ADDs (SPUDD as presented in [8])
with approximate value iteration using different pruning strengths Æ. In order to avoid
overly aggressive pruning in the early stage of the value iterations, we need to take into
account the size of the value function at every iteration. Therefore, we use a sliding pruning
strength specified as Æ
P n
i=0  i extent(R) where R is the initial reward diagram,  is the
discount factor introduced earlier and n is the iteration number.
We illustrate running time, value function size (internal nodes and leaf nodes), number of
iterations, and the average sum of squared difference between the optimal value function,
V  , and the value of the approximate policy, V ~  .
It is important to note that the pruning strength is an upper bound on the approximation
error. That is, the optimal values are guaranteed to lie within the ranges of the approximate
3 See [9] for details.
4 Experiments showed that conclusions in this section are independent of variable order.

ranged value function. However, as noted earlier, this bound does not hold for the value of
an induced policy, as can be seen at 3% pruning in the last column of Table 1.
The effects of approximation on the performance of the value iteration algorithm are three­
fold. First, the approximation itself introduces an overhead which depends on the size of
the value function being approximated. This effect can be seen in Table 1 at low pruning
strengths (1 2%), where the running time is increased from that taken by optimal value
iteration. Second, the ranges in the value function reduce the number of iterations needed
to attain convergence, as can be seen in Table 1 for pruning strengths greater than 2%.
However, for the lower pruning strengths, this effect is not observed. This can be explained
by the fact that a small number of states with values much greater (or much lower) than
that of the rest of the state space may never be approximated. Therefore, to converge, this
portion of the state space requires the same number of iterations as in the optimal case 5 .
The third effect of approximation is to reduce the size of the value functions, thus reducing
the per iteration computation time during value iteration. This effect is clearly seen at prun­
ing strengths greater than 2%, where it overtakes the cost of approximation, and generates
significant time and space savings. Speed ups of 2 and 4 fold are obtained for pruning
strengths of 3% and 4% respectively. Furthermore, fewer than 60 leaf nodes represent the
entire state space, while value errors in the policy do not exceed 6%. This confirms our
initial hypothesis that many values within a given domain are very similar and thus, replac­
ing such values with ranges drastically reduces the size of the resulting diagram without
significantly affecting the quality of the resulting policy. Pruning above 5% has a larger er­
ror, and takes a very short time to converge. Pruning strengths of more than 40% generate
policies which are close to trivial, where a single action is always taken.
4.2 Variable reordering
15 20 25 30 35
10 2
10 3
10 4
10 5
10 6
boolean variables
value
diagram
internal
nodes shuffled - no reorder
intuitive (unshuffled) - no reorder
shuffled - reorder minspan
shuffled - reorder random
shuffled - reorder sift
Figure 3: Sizes of final value diagrams plotted as a function of the problem domain size.
Results in the previous section were all generated using the ``intuitive'' variable ordering for
the problem at hand. It is probable that such an ordering is close to optimal, but such order­
ings may not always be obvious, and the effects of a poor ordering on the resources required
for policy generation can be extreme. Therefore, to characterize the reordering methods
discussed in Section 3.3, we start with initially randomly shuffled orders and compare the
sizes of the final value diagrams with those found using the intuitive order.
5 We are currently looking into alleviating this effect in order to increase convergence speed for
low pruning strengths

In Figure 3 we present results obtained from approximate value iteration with a pruning
strength of 3% applied to a range of problem domain sizes.
In the absence of any reordering, diagrams produced with randomly shuffled variable orders
are up to 3 times larger than those produced with the intuitive (unshuffled) order. The
minimum span reordering method, starting from a randomly shuffled order, finds orders
which are equivalent to the intuitive one, producing value diagrams with nearly identical
size. The sifting and random reordering methods find orders which reduce the sizes further
by up to a factor of 7.
Reordering attempts take time, but on the other hand, DP is faster with smaller diagrams.
Value iteration with the sifting reordering method (starting with shuffled orders) was found
to run in time similar to that of value iteration with the intuitive ordering, while the other
reordering methods took slightly longer. All reordering methods, however, reduced running
times and diagram sizes from that using no reordering, by factors of 3 to 5.
5 Concluding Remarks
We examined a method for approximate dynamic programming for MDPs using ADDs.
ADDs are found to be ideally suited to this task. The results we present have clearly shown
their applicability on a range of MDPs with up to 34 billion states. Investigations into the
use of variable reordering during value iteration have also proved fruitful, and yield large
improvements in the sizes of value diagrams. Results show that our policy generator is
robust to the variable order, and so this is no longer a constraint for problem specification.
References
[1] R. Iris Bahar, Erica A. Frohm, Charles M. Gaona, Gary D. Hachtel, Enrico Macii, Abelardo
Pardo, and Fabio Somenzi. Algebraic decision diagrams and their applications. In International
Conference on Computer­Aided Design, pages 188--191. IEEE, 1993.
[2] Craig Boutilier and Richard Dearden. Approximating value trees in structured dynamic pro­
gramming. In Proceedings ICML­96, Bari, Italy, 1996.
[3] Craig Boutilier, Richard Dearden, and Mois’es Goldszmidt. Exploiting structure in policy con­
struction. In Proceedings Fourteenth Inter. Conf on AI (IJCAI­95), 1995.
[4] Randal E. Bryant. Graph­based algorithms for boolean function manipulation. IEEE Transac­
tions on Computers, C­35(8):677--691, 1986.
[5] E. M. Clarke, K. L. McMillan, X. Zhao, M. Fujita, and J. Yang. Spectral transforms for large
boolean functions with applications to technology mapping. In DAC, 54--60. ACM/IEEE, 1993.
[6] Thomas Dean and Keiji Kanazawa. A model for reasoning about persistence and causation.
Computational Intelligence, 5(3):142--150, 1989.
[7] Richard Dearden and Craig Boutilier. Abstraction and approximate decision theoretic planning.
Artificial Intelligence, 89:219--283, 1997.
[8] Jesse Hoey, Robert St­Aubin, Alan Hu, and Craig Boutilier. SPUDD: Stochastic planning using
decision diagrams. In Proceedings of UAI99, Stockholm, 1999.
[9] Jesse Hoey, Robert St­Aubin, Alan Hu, and Craig Boutilier. Optimal and approximate planning
using decision diagrams. Technical Report TR­00­05, UBC, June 2000.
[10] Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming.
Wiley, New York, NY., 1994.
[11] Satinder P. Singh and Richard C. Yee. An upper bound on the loss from approximate optimal­
value function. Machine Learning, 16:227--233, 1994.
[12] Fabio Somenzi. CUDD: CU decision diagram package. Available from
ftp://vlsi.colorado.edu/pub/, 1998.

