Improvisation and Learning
Judy A. Franklin \Lambda
Computer Science Department
Smith College
Northampton, MA 01063
jfranklin@cs.smith.edu
Abstract
This article presents a 2­phase computational learning model and appli­
cation. As a demonstration, a system has been built, called CHIME for
Computer Human Interacting Musical Entity. In phase 1 of training, re­
current back­propagationtrains the machine to reproduce3 jazz melodies.
The recurrent network is expanded and is further trained in phase 2 with a
reinforcement learning algorithm and a critique produced by a set of basic
rules for jazz improvisation. After each phase CHIME can interactively
improvise with a human in real time.
1 Foundations
Jazz improvisation is the creation of a jazz melody in real time. Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gille­
spie, Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Charles Mingus, Thelonious Monk, and Sonny Rollins et
al. were the founders of bebop and post bop jazz [9] where drummers, bassists, and pianists
keep the beat and maintain harmonic structure. Other players improvise over this structure
and even take turns improvising for 4 bars at a time. This is called trading fours.
Meanwhile, artificial neural networks have been used in computer music [4, 12]. In partic­
ular, the work of (Todd [11]) is the basis for phase 1 of CHIME, a novice machine improvi­
sor that learns to trade fours. Firstly, a recurrent network is trained with back­propagation
to play three jazz melodies by Sonny Rollins [1], as described in Section 2. Phase 2 uses
actor­critic reinforcement learning and is described in Section 3. This section is on jazz ba­
sics.
1.1 Basics: Chords, the ii­V­I Chord Progression and Scales
The harmonic structure mentioned above is a series of chords that may be reprated and that
are often grouped into standard subsequences. A chord is a group of notes played simulta­
neously. In the chromatic scale, C­Db­D­Eb­E­F­Gb­G­Ab­A­Bb­B­C, notes are separated
by a half step. A flat (b) note is a half step below the original note; a sharp (#) is a half above.
Two half steps are a whole step. Two whole steps are a major third. Three half steps are a
minor third.
A major triad (chord) is the first or tonic note, then the note a major third up, then the note a
minor third up. When F is the tonic, F major triad is F­A­C. A minor triad (chord) is the tonic
\Lambda www.cs.smith.edu/”jfrankli

then a minor third, then a major third. F minor triad is F­Ab­C. The diminished triad is the
tonic, then a minor third, then a minor third. F diminished triad is F­Ab­Cb. An augmented
triad is the tonic, then a major third, then a major third. The F augmented triad is F­A­Db.
A third added to the top of a triad forms a seventh chord. A major triad plus a major third is
the major seventh chord. F­A­C­E is the F major seventh chord (Fmaj7). A minor triad plus
a minor third is a minor seventh chord. For F it is F­Ab­C­Eb (Fm7). A major triad plus a
minor third is a dominant seventh chord. For F it is F­A­C­Eb (F7). These three types of
chords are used heavily in jazz harmony. Notice that each note in the chromatic scales can
be the tonic note for any of these types of chords.
A scale, a subset of the chromatic scale, is characterized by note intervals. Let W be a whole
step and H be a half. The chromatic scale is HHHHHHHHHHHH. The major scale or ionian
mode is WWHWWWH. F major scale is F­G­A­Bb­C­D­E­F. The notes in a scale are de­
grees; E is the seventh degree of F major. The first, third, fifth, and seventh notes of a major
scale are the major seventh chord. The first, third, fifth, and seventh notes of other modes
produce the minor seventh and dominant seventh chords. Roman numerals represent scale
degrees and their seventh chords. Upper case implies major or dominant seventh and lower
case implies minor seventh [9]. The major seventh chord starting at the scale tonic is the I
(one) chord. G is the second degree of F major, and G­Bb­D­F is Gm7, the ii chord, with re­
spect to F. The ii­V­I progression is prevalent in jazz [9], and for F it is Gm7­C7­Fmaj7. The
minor ii­V­i progression is obtained using diminished and augmented triads, their seventh
chords, and the aeolian mode. Seventh chords can be extended by adding major or minor
thirds, e.g. Fmaj9, Fmaj11, Fmaj13, Gm9, Gm11, and Gm13. Any extension can be raised
or lowered by 1 step [9] to obtain, e.g. Fmaj7#11, C7#9, C7b9, C7#11.
Most jazz compositions are either the 12 bar blues or sectional forms (e.g. ABAB, ABAC,
or AABA) [8]. The 3 Rollins songs are 12 bar blues. ``Blue 7'' has a simple blues form. In
``Solid'' and ``Tenor Madness'', Rollins adds bebop variations to the blues form [1]. ii­V­I
and VI­II­V­I progressions are added and G7+9 substitutes for the VI and F7+9 for the V
(see section 1.2 below); the II­V in the last bar provides the turnaround to the I of the first bar
to foster smooth repetition of the form. The result is at left and in Roman numeral notation
at right:
Bb7 Bb7 Bb7 Bb7
Eb7 Eb7 Bb7 G7+9
Cm7 F7 Bb7 G7+9 C7 F7+9
I I I I
IV IV I VI
ii V I VI II V
1.2 Scale Substitutions and Rules for Reinforcement Learning
First note that the theory and rules derived in this subsection are used in Phase 2, to be de­
scribed in Section 3. They are presented here since they derive from the jazz basics immedi­
ately preceding. One way a novice improvisor can play is to associate one scale with each
chord and choose notes from that scale when the chord is presented in the musical score.
Therefore, Rule 1 is that an improvisor may choose notes from a ``standard'' scale associ­
ated with a chord. Next, the 4th degree of the scale is often avoided on a major or dominant
seventh chord (Rule 3), unless the player can resolve its dissonance. The major 7th is an
avoid note on a dominant seventh chord (Rule 4) since a dominant seventh chord and its
scale contain the flat 7th, not the major 7th.
Rule 2 contains many notes that can be added. A brief rationale is given next. The C7 in
Gm7­C7­Fmaj7 may be replaced by a C7#11, a C7+ chord, or a C7b9b5 or C7alt chord [9].
The scales for C7+ and C7#11 make available the raised fourth (flat 5), and flat 6 (flat 13)
for improvising. The C7b9b5 and C7alt (C7+9) chords and their scales make available the
flat9, raised 9, flat5 and raised 5 [1]. These substitutions provide the notes of Rule 2. These
rules (used in phase 2) are stated below, using for reinforcement values very bad (­1.0), bad
(­0.5), a little bad (­0.25), ok (0.25), good (0.5), and very good (1.0). The rules are discussed

further in Section 4.
The Rule Set:
1) Any note in the scale associated with the chord is ok (except as noted in rule 3).
2) On a dominant seventh, hip notes 9, flat9, #9, #11, 13 or flat13 are very good. One hip
note 2 times in a row is a little bad. 2 hip notes more than 2 times in a row is a little bad.
3) If the chord is a dominant seventh chord, a natural 4th note is bad.
4) If the chord is a dominant seventh chord, a natural 7th is very bad.
5) A rest is good unless it is held for more than 2 16th notes and then it is very bad.
6) Any note played longer than 1 beat (4 16th notes) is very bad.
7) If two consecutive notes match the human's, that is good.
2 CHIME Phase 1
In Phase 1, supervised learning is used to train a recurrent network to reproduce the three
Sonny Rollins melodies.
2.1 Network Details and Training
The recurrent network's output units are linear. The hidden units are nonlinear (logistic
function). Todd [11] used a Jordan recurrent network [6] for classical melody learning and
generation. In CHIME, a Jordan net is also used, with the addition of the chord as input
(Figure 1. 24 of the 26 outputs are notes (2 chromatic octaves), the 25th is a rest, and the
26th indicates a new note. The output with the highest value above a threshold is the next
note, including the rest output. The new note output indicates if this is a new note, or if it
is the same note being held for another time step (16 th note resolution).
The 12 chord inputs (12 notes in a chromatic scale), are 1 or 0. A chord is represented as
its first, third, fifth, and seventh notes and it ``wraps around'' within the 12 inputs. E.g., the
Fm7 chord F­Ab­C­Eb is represented as C, Eb, F, Ab or 100101001000. One plan input per
song enables distinguishing between songs. The 26 context inputs use eligibility traces, giv­
ing the hidden units a decaying history of notes played. CHIME (as did Todd) uses teacher
forcing [13], wherein the target outputs for the previous step are used as inputs (so erro­
neous outputs are not used as inputs). Todd used from 8 to 15 hidden units; CHIME uses
50. The learning rate is 0.075 (Todd used 0.05). The eligibility rate is 0.9 (Todd used 0.8).
Differences in values perhaps reflect contrasting styles of the songs and available computing
power.
Todd used 15 output units and assumed a rest when all note units are ``turned off.'' CHIME
uses 24 output note units (2 octaves). Long rests in the Rollins tunes require a dedicated
output unit for a rest. Without it, the note outputs learned to turn off all the time. Below
are results of four representative experiments. In all experiments, 15,000 presentations of
the songs were made. Each song has 192 16th note events. All songs are played at a fixed
tempo. Weights are initialized to small random values. The squared error is the average
squared error over one complete presentation of the song. ``Finessing'' the network may
improve these values. The songs are easily recognized however, and an exact match could
impair the network's ability to improvise. Figure 2 shows the results for ``Solid.''
Experiment 1. Song: Blue Seven. Squared error starts at 185, decreases to 2.67.
Experiment 2. Song: Tenor Madness. Squared error starts at 218, decreases to 1.05.
Experiment 3. Song: Solid. Squared error starts at 184, decreases to 3.77.
Experiment 4. Song: All three songs: Squared error starts at 185, decreases to 36.

